Management’s Overview of Third Quarter 2022 Performance
In the third quarter, prolonged public market volatility continued to impact public and private fundraising activity, pressuring balance sheet growth and
market-related revenues. Despite challenging market conditions, we delivered overall healthy performance. Net interest income grew, with moderating
positive impact from high interest rates due to deposit outflows and higher funding costs. We also saw solid loan growth and continued strong credit
performance. Core fee income growth was robust, as interest rate increases drove improved client investment fee margins.
Reference Rate Reform
The publication of the British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc and Japanese Yen LIBOR settings and one-week and two-month U.S. dollar LIBOR settings
terminated at the end of December 2021, leaving the remaining U.S. dollar LIBOR settings (i.e., overnight, one month, three month, six month and 12 month)
in place, which are expected to terminate at the end of June 2023. Therefore, existing contracts referencing all other U.S. dollar LIBOR settings must be
remediated no later than June 30, 2023. We hold instruments that may be impacted by the discontinuance of LIBOR, including loans, investments and
derivative products that use LIBOR as a benchmark rate.
Our LIBOR Transition Program consists of dedicated leadership and staff, and continues to engage with relevant business lines and support groups. As
part of this program, we continue to identify, assess and monitor risks associated with the discontinuation of LIBOR, including monitoring the population of
loans and contracts that are impacted and how LIBOR reference rates are reflected in our measurement of sensitivity to changes in interest rates until
publication of LIBOR rates are fully phased out. We completed a review across all business lines and confirmed that language to facilitate a transition to an alternative reference rate is
included in our existing deals that carry LIBOR exposure. Migration of legacy LIBOR contracts has commenced based on regulatory timelines, with proactive
remediation conducted for existing LIBOR facilities that contained currencies tied to LIBOR rates that ceased publication as of December 31, 2021. A
communications and training plan supports the delivery of new alternative reference rate products and assists with the transition away from LIBOR.
We have adopted SOFR as our preferred replacement index for U.S. dollar LIBOR and received Term SOFR licensing from the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange in the fourth quarter of 2021. We currently offer products based on alternative reference rates across multiple currencies including the U.S. Dollar,
British Pound Sterling, and Euro.

Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our accounting policies are fundamental to understanding our financial condition and results of operations. We have identified one policy as being
critical because it requires us to make particularly difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments about matters that are inherently uncertain, and because it
is likely that materially different amounts would be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. We evaluate our estimates and
assumptions on an ongoing basis and we base these estimates on historical experiences and various other factors and assumptions that are believed to be
reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
There have been no significant changes during the nine months ended September 30, 2022 to the items that we disclosed as our critical accounting
policies and estimates in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” under Part II, Item 7 of our 2021 Form 10-
K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2022, the FASB issued Accounting Standard Update No. 2022-01, Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815), which allows multiple hedged layers to
be designated in a single closed portfolio of financial assets. As a result, an entity can achieve hedge accounting for hedges of a greater proportion of the
interest rate risk inherent in the assets included in the closed portfolio, further aligning hedge accounting with our risk management strategies. The update
allows for a one-time transfer of certain debt securities from HTM to AFS upon adoption. This update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15,
2022, and interim periods within those fiscal years. We are evaluating early adoption of this standard in the fourth quarter of 2022 as a result of the hedging
opportunities permitted by the standard in a rising interest rate environment. We are assessing the effect of this update on our consolidated financial
statements and related disclosures.
In March 2022, the FASB issued Accounting Standard Update No. 2022-02, Financial Instruments — Credit Losses (Topic 326), which eliminates the
accounting guidance for TDRs by creditors while enhancing disclosure requirements for certain loan refinancings and restructurings by creditors made to
borrowers experiencing financial difficulty. The update also requires disclosure of current-period gross write-offs by year of origination for financing
receivables. The update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, and interim periods within those fiscal years. We do not expect the
adoption of the update to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.
In June 2022, the FASB issued Accounting Standard Update No. 2022-03, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 820), which clarifies that a contractual
restriction on the sale of an equity security is not considered part of the unit of account of the equity security and, therefore, is not considered in measuring
fair value. The update is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, and interim periods within those fiscal years. SVB currently applies a
discount on securities covered by contractual restrictions, and these discounts will be removed upon adoption. We do not expect the adoption of the update
to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.

Results of Operations
Net Interest Income and Margin (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
Net interest income is defined as the difference between: (i) interest earned on loans, fixed income investments in our AFS and HTM securities
portfolios and short-term investment securities and (ii) interest paid on funding sources. Net interest margin is defined as annualized net interest income, on
a fully taxable equivalent basis, as a percentage of average interest-earning assets. Net interest income and net interest margin are presented on a fully
taxable equivalent basis to consistently reflect income from taxable loans and securities and tax-exempt securities based on the applicable federal statutory
tax rate.
Analysis of Net Interest Income Changes Due to Volume and Rate (Fully Taxable Equivalent Basis)
Net interest income is affected by changes in the amount and mix of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, referred to as “volume
change.” Net interest income is also affected by changes in yields earned on interest-earning assets and rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities, referred to as
“rate change.” The following table sets forth changes in interest income for each major category of interest-earning assets and interest expense for each
major category of interest-bearing liabilities. The table also reflects the amount of simultaneous changes attributable to both volume and rate changes for the
periods indicated. For this table, changes that are not solely due to either volume or rate are allocated in proportion to the percentage changes in average
volume and average rate. 