
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the “Exchange Act”) relating to our operations, results of operations and other matters that are based on our current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections. Words such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “likely,” “anticipates,” “aspires,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “projects,” “believes,” “estimates,” “positioned,” “outlook,” “goal,” “target,” and similar expressions are used to identify these forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Forward-looking statements are based upon assumptions as to future events that may not prove to be accurate. Actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecast in these forward-looking statements. Risks, uncertainties and other factors that might cause such differences, some of which could be material, include but are not limited to those identified below.
•Our results of operations have been, and may in the future be, adversely affected by volatile, negative or uncertain economic and political conditions and the effects of these conditions on our clients’ businesses and levels of business activity. •Our business depends on generating and maintaining client demand for our services and solutions, including through the adaptation and expansion of our services and solutions in response to ongoing changes in technology and offerings, and a significant reduction in such demand or an inability to respond to the evolving technological environment could materially affect our results of operations. •If we are unable to match people and their skills with client demand around the world and attract and retain professionals with strong leadership skills, our business, the utilization rate of our professionals and our results of operations may be materially adversely affected. •We face legal, reputational and financial risks from any failure to protect client and/or Accenture data from security incidents or cyberattacks. •The markets in which we operate are highly competitive, and we might not be able to compete effectively. •Our ability to attract and retain business and employees may depend on our reputation in the marketplace. •Our environmental, social and governance (ESG) commitments and disclosures may expose us to reputational risks and legal liability. •If we do not successfully manage and develop our relationships with key ecosystem partners or if we fail to anticipate and establish new alliances in new technologies, our results of operations could be adversely affected.
•Our profitability could materially suffer if we are unable to obtain favorable pricing for our services and solutions, if we are unable to remain competitive, if our cost-management strategies are unsuccessful or if we experience delivery inefficiencies or fail to satisfy certain agreed-upon targets or specific service levels. •Changes in our level of taxes, as well as audits, investigations and tax proceedings, or changes in tax laws or in their interpretation or enforcement, could have a material adverse effect on our effective tax rate, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition. •Our results of operations could be materially adversely affected by fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. •Changes to accounting standards or in the estimates and assumptions we make in connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements could adversely affect our financial results.
•As a result of our geographically diverse operations and strategy to continue to grow in key markets around the world, we are more susceptible to certain risks.•If we are unable to manage the organizational challenges associated with our size, we might be unable to achieve our business objectives.•We might not be successful at acquiring, investing in or integrating businesses, entering into joint ventures or divesting businesses.
•Our business could be materially adversely affected if we incur legal liability. •Our global operations expose us to numerous and sometimes conflicting legal and regulatory requirements, and violation of these regulations could harm our business.•Our work with government clients exposes us to additional risks inherent in the government contracting environment. •If we are unable to protect or enforce our intellectual property rights, or if our services or solutions infringe upon the intellectual property rights of others or we lose our ability to utilize the intellectual property of others, our business could be adversely affected.•We are incorporated in Ireland and Irish law differs from the laws in effect in the United States and might afford less protection to our shareholders. We may also be subject to criticism and negative publicity related to our incorporation in Ireland.For a more detailed discussion of these factors, see the information under the heading “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended August 31, 2022. In addition, the timing and amount of costs related to our business optimization actions and the nature and extent of benefits realized from such actions are subject to uncertainties and other factors, including local country consultation processes and regulations, and may differ from our current expectations and estimates. Our forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this report or as of the date they are made, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements.
Accenture is a leading global professional services company, providing a broad range of services and solutions across Strategy & Consulting, Technology, Operations, Industry X and Song. We serve clients in three geographic markets: North America, Europe and Growth Markets (Asia Pacific, Latin America, Africa and the Middle East). We combine our strength in technology with industry experience, functional expertise and global delivery capability to help the world’s leading businesses, governments and other organizations build their digital core, optimize their operations, accelerate revenue growth and enhance citizen services—creating tangible value at speed and scale.Our results of operations are affected by economic conditions, including macroeconomic conditions, the overall inflationary environment and levels of business confidence. There continues to be significant economic and geopolitical uncertainty in many markets around the world, which has impacted and may continue to impact our business, particularly with regard to wage inflation and volatility in foreign currency exchange rates. In some cases, these conditions have slowed the pace and level of client spending.
We saw strong demand across our business in the second quarter of fiscal 2023. Key metrics for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2022 are included below. We have presented operating margin and diluted earnings per share on a non-GAAP or “adjusted” basis to exclude the impact of $244 million in business optimization costs recorded during the second quarter of fiscal 2023. For additional information, see Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”•Revenues of $15.8 billion, representing 5% growth in U.S. dollars and 9% growth in local currency;•New bookings of $22.1 billion, an increase of 13% in U.S. dollars and 17% in local currency;•Operating margin of 12.3%, compared to 13.7% in the second quarter of fiscal 2022; adjusted operating margin expanded 10 basis points to 13.8%;•Diluted earnings per share of $2.39, compared to $2.54 in the second quarter of fiscal 2022; adjusted earnings per share increased 6% to $2.69; and•Cash returned to shareholders of $1.8 billion, including share purchases of $1.1 billion and dividends of $708 million.
(1)Effective June 1, 2022, we revised the reporting of our industry groups for the movement of Aerospace & Defense from Communications, Media & Technology to Products. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
Revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased 5% in U.S. dollars and 9% in local currency compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Revenues for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased 5% in U.S. dollars and 12% in local currency compared to the six months ended February 28, 2022. During the second quarter of fiscal 2023, revenue growth in local currency was very strong in Growth Markets and Europe and solid in North America. We experienced local currency revenue growth that was very strong in Resources, Health & Public Service and Financial Services, strong in Products and flat in Communications, Media & Technology. Revenue growth in local currency was very strong in managed services and solid in consulting during the second quarter of fiscal 2023. In the second quarter of fiscal 2023, pricing, which we define as the contract profitability or margin on the work that we sell, was relatively stable.In our consulting business, revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 decreased 1% in U.S. dollars and increased 4% in local currency compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Consulting revenues for the six months ended February 28, 2023 were flat in U.S. dollars and increased 7% in local currency compared to the six months ended February 28, 2022. Consulting revenue growth in local currency for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was very strong in Growth Markets, solid in Europe and flat in North America. Our consulting revenue continues to be driven by helping our clients accelerate their digital transformation, including moving to the cloud, embedding security across the enterprise and adopting new technologies. In addition, clients continue to be focused on initiatives designed to deliver cost savings and operational efficiency, as well as projects to accelerate growth and improve customer experiences.In our managed services business, revenues for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased 12% in U.S. dollars and 16% in local currency compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Managed services revenues for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased 12% in U.S. dollars and 18% in local currency compared to the six months ended February 28, 2022. Managed services revenue in local currency for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was driven by very strong growth in Europe, Growth Markets and North America. We continue to experience growing demand to assist clients with application modernization and maintenance, cloud enablement and managed security services. In addition, clients continue to be focused on transforming their operations through data and analytics, automation and artificial intelligence to drive productivity and operational cost savings.As we are a global company, our revenues are denominated in multiple currencies and may be significantly affected by currency exchange rate fluctuations. While a significant portion of our revenues are in U.S. dollars, the majority of our revenues are denominated in other currencies, including the Euro, Japanese yen and U.K. pound. There continues to be volatility in foreign currency exchange rates. Unfavorable fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates have had and could in the future have a material effect on our financial results. If the U.S. dollar weakens against other currencies, resulting in favorable currency translation, our revenues, revenue growth and results of operations in U.S. dollars may be higher. If the U.S. dollar strengthens against other currencies, resulting in unfavorable currency translation, our revenues, revenue growth and results of operations in U.S. dollars may be lower. The U.S. dollar strengthened against various currencies during the three and six months ended February 28, 2023 compared to the three and six months ended February 28, 2022, resulting in unfavorable currency translation and U.S. dollar revenue growth that was approximately 4% and 7% lower, respectively, than our revenue growth in local currency. Assuming that exchange rates stay within recent ranges for the remainder of fiscal 2023, we estimate that our full fiscal 2023 revenue growth in U.S. dollars will be approximately 4.5% lower than our revenue growth in local currency.
Utilization for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was 91%, compared to 92% in the second quarter of fiscal 2022. We hire to meet current and projected future demand. We proactively plan and manage the size and composition of our workforce and take actions as needed to address changes in the anticipated demand for our services and solutions, given that compensation costs are the most significant portion of our operating expenses. Our workforce, the majority of which serves our clients, increased to approximately 738,000 as of February 28, 2023, compared to approximately 699,000 as of February 28, 2022. The year-over-year increase in our workforce reflects demand for our services and solutions, as well as people added in connection with acquisitions. While we continue to hire, especially to support our strategic growth priorities, during the second quarter of fiscal 2023, we initiated actions to streamline our operations and transform our non-billable corporate functions to reduce costs. Over the next 18 months, these actions are expected to result in the departure of approximately 19,000 people (or 2.5% of our current workforce), and we expect over half of these departures will consist of people in our non-billable corporate functions.
For the second quarter of fiscal 2023, attrition, excluding involuntary terminations, was 12%, down from 18% in the second quarter of fiscal 2022. We evaluate voluntary attrition, adjust levels of new hiring and use involuntary terminations as a means to keep our supply of skills and resources in balance with changes in client demand.In addition, we adjust compensation in order to attract and retain appropriate numbers of qualified employees. For the majority of our people, compensation increases become effective December 1st of each fiscal year. Given the overall inflationary environment, compensation has been and continues to increase faster than in prior years. We strive to adjust pricing as well as drive cost and delivery efficiencies, such as changing the mix of people and utilizing technology, to reduce the impact of compensation increases on our margin and contract profitability.Our ability to grow our revenues and maintain or increase our margin could be adversely affected if we are unable to: match people and skills with the types or amounts of services and solutions clients are demanding; recover or offset increases in compensation; deploy our employees globally on a timely basis; manage attrition; and/or effectively assimilate new employees.
The primary categories of operating expenses include Cost of services, Sales and marketing and General and administrative costs. Cost of services is primarily driven by the cost of people serving our clients, which consists mainly of compensation, subcontractor and other payroll costs, and non-payroll costs on managed services contracts. Cost of services includes a variety of activities such as: contract delivery; recruiting and training; software development; and integration of acquisitions. Sales and marketing costs are driven primarily by: compensation costs for business development activities; marketing- and advertising-related activities; and certain acquisition-related costs. General and administrative costs primarily include costs for people that are non-client-facing, information systems, office space and certain acquisition-related costs.Gross margin (Revenues less Cost of services as a percentage of Revenues) for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was 30.6%, compared with 30.1% for the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Gross margin for the six months ended February 28, 2023 was 31.7% compared with 31.5% for the six months ended February 28, 2022. The increase in gross margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was primarily due to lower labor costs, including lower subcontractor costs, partially offset by higher non-payroll costs, primarily for travel. The increase in gross margin for the six months ended February 28, 2023 was primarily due to lower labor costs, including lower subcontractor costs.Sales and marketing and General and administrative costs as a percentage of revenues were 16.7% for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and 16.6% for the six months ended February 28, 2023, compared with 16.4% for the second quarter of fiscal 2022 and 16.5% for the six months ended February 28, 2022. For the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023, compared to the same period in fiscal 2022, Sales and marketing costs increased 50 and 30 basis points, respectively. The increase in Sales and marketing for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023 was due to higher selling and other business development costs as a percentage of revenues. For the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023, compared to the same period in fiscal 2022, General and administrative costs decreased 20 basis points as a percentage of revenues.During the three and six months ended February 28, 2023, we recorded $244 million in business optimization costs, primarily for employee severance. As part of these business optimization initiatives, we expect to record total costs of approximately $1.5 billion, with approximately $800 million in fiscal 2023 and $700 million in fiscal 2024. The $1.5 billion is expected to consist of $1.2 billion of employee severance and other personnel costs and $300 million related to the consolidation of office space. The actual amount and timing of costs are dependent in part upon local country consultation processes and regulations and may differ from our current expectations and estimates. For additional information, see Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.” Operating margin (Operating income as a percentage of Revenues) for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was 12.3%, compared with 13.7% for the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Operating margin for the six months ended February 28, 2023 was 14.4%, compared with 15.0% for the six months ended February 28, 2022. The business optimization costs recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2023 decreased operating margin by 150 and 80 basis points for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023, respectively. Excluding these costs, operating margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023 increased 10 and 20 basis points to 13.8% and 15.2%, respectively.
The effective tax rates for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and 2022 were 20.4% and 19.2%, respectively. The effective tax rate for both the six months ended February 28, 2023 and 2022 was 22.0%. The business optimization costs of $244 million and related reduction in tax expense of $52 million did not significantly impact our effective tax rates for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 or six months ended February 28, 2023.
Diluted earnings per share were $2.39 for the second quarter of fiscal 2023, compared with $2.54 for the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Diluted earnings per share were $5.47 for the six months ended February 28, 2023, compared with $5.32 for the six months ended February 28, 2022. The $193 million of business optimization costs, net of related taxes, decreased diluted earnings per share by $0.30 for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023. Excluding these impacts, diluted earnings per share were $2.69 and $5.77 for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and six months ended February 28, 2023, respectively.
We have presented operating income, operating margin, effective tax rates and diluted earnings per share for fiscal 2023, excluding the impact of the business optimization costs, as we believe doing so facilitates understanding as to the impact of these items and our performance in comparison to the prior period. While we believe that this non-GAAP financial information is useful in evaluating our operations, this information should be considered as supplemental in nature and not as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP.
We provide information regarding our new bookings, which include new contracts, including those acquired through acquisitions, as well as renewals, extensions and changes to existing contracts, because we believe doing so provides useful trend information regarding changes in the volume of our new business over time. New bookings can vary significantly quarter to quarter depending in part on the timing of the signing of a small number of large managed services contracts. The types of services and solutions clients are demanding and the pace and level of their spending may impact the conversion of new bookings to revenues. For example, managed services bookings, which are typically for multi-year contracts, generally convert to revenue over a longer period of time compared to consulting bookings.Information regarding our new bookings is not comparable to, nor should it be substituted for, an analysis of our revenues over time. New bookings involve estimates and judgments. There are no third-party standards or requirements governing the calculation of bookings. We do not update our new bookings for material subsequent terminations or reductions related to bookings originally recorded in prior fiscal years. New bookings are recorded using then-existing foreign currency exchange rates and are not subsequently adjusted for foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. The majority of our contracts are terminable by the client on short notice with little or no termination penalties, and some without notice. Only the non-cancelable portion of these contracts is included in our remaining performance obligations disclosed in Note 2 (Revenues) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.” Accordingly, a significant portion of what we consider contract bookings is not included in our remaining performance obligations.
Revenues by geographic market, industry group and type of work are as follows:
(1)Effective June 1, 2022, we revised the reporting of our industry groups for the movement of Aerospace & Defense from Communications, Media & Technology to Products. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
The following revenues commentary discusses local currency revenue changes for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2022:
•North America revenues increased 5% in local currency, led by growth in Public Service, Health and Utilities. These increases were partially offset by a decline in Communications & Media and High Tech. Revenue growth was driven by the United States.•Europe revenues increased 12% in local currency, led by growth in Industrial, Banking & Capital Markets and Public Service. Revenue growth was driven by Germany, Italy and France.•Growth Markets revenues increased 14% in local currency, led by growth in Banking & Capital Markets, Chemicals & Natural Resources and Public Service. Revenue growth was led by Japan.
Operating expenses for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased $884 million, or 7%, compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2022, and increased as a percentage of revenues to 87.7% compared to 86.3% during this period. The increase as a percentage of revenues is primarily due to business optimization costs of $244 million recorded in the second quarter of fiscal 2023.
Operating expenses by category are as follows:
Cost of services for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased $457 million, or 4%, over the second quarter of fiscal 2022, and decreased as a percentage of revenues to 69.4% from 69.9% during this period. Gross margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased as a percentage of revenues to 30.6% over 30.1% during the second quarter of fiscal 2022. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to lower labor costs, including lower subcontractor costs, partially offset by higher non-payroll costs, primarily for travel compared to the same period in fiscal 2022.
Sales and marketing expense for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased $149 million, or 11%, over the second quarter of fiscal 2022, and increased as a percentage of revenues to 9.9% over 9.4% during this period due to higher selling and other business development costs.
General and administrative costs for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased $35 million, or 3%, over the second quarter of fiscal 2022, and decreased as a percentage of revenues to 6.8% from 7.0% during this period.
During the second quarter of fiscal 2023, we recorded business optimization costs of $244 million, primarily for employee severance. For additional information, see Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”
Operating income for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 decreased $117 million, or 6%, from the second quarter of fiscal 2022. Operating margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was 12.3%, compared with 13.7% for the second quarter of fiscal 2022. The business optimization costs decreased operating margin by 150 basis points. Excluding these costs, operating margin for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 increased 10 basis points to 13.8%.Operating income and operating margin for each of the geographic markets are as follows:
(1)Costs recorded in connection with our business optimization initiatives, primarily for employee severance.We estimate that the aggregate percentage impact of foreign currency exchange rates on our operating income during the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was similar to that disclosed for revenue for each geographic market. In addition, during the second quarter of fiscal 2023 each geographic market’s operating income was unfavorably impacted by business optimization costs. The commentary below provides insight into other factors affecting geographic market performance and operating income for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 compared with the second quarter of fiscal 2022: •North America operating income decreased as managed services revenue growth was more than offset by higher labor costs, including an increase in selling and other business development costs as a percentage of revenues.•Europe operating income increased due to revenue growth.•Growth Markets operating income increased primarily due to higher contract profitability and revenue growth.
Interest income for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was $50 million, an increase of $43 million over the second quarter of fiscal 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher interest rates.
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of foreign currency gains and losses, non-operating components of pension expense, as well as gains and losses associated with our investments. During the second quarter of fiscal 2023, other income (expense), net increased $29 million over the second quarter of fiscal 2022, primarily due to foreign currency exchange losses. For additional information, see Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”
The effective tax rates for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 and 2022 were 20.4% and 19.2%, respectively. The higher effective tax rate for the second quarter of fiscal 2023 was primarily due to lower tax benefits from share-based payments, partially offset by lower tax expense from changes in the geographic distribution of earnings. The business optimization costs of $244 million and related reduction in tax expense of $52 million did not significantly impact our effective tax rate for the second quarter of fiscal 2023.
Diluted earnings per share were $2.39 for the second quarter of fiscal 2023, compared with $2.54 for the second quarter of fiscal 2022. The $193 million of business optimization costs, net of related taxes, decreased diluted earnings per share by $0.30 during the second quarter of fiscal 2023. Excluding this impact, diluted earnings per share were $2.69 for the second quarter of fiscal 2023. For information regarding our earnings per share calculations, see Note 3 (Earnings Per Share) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”
The decrease in diluted earnings per share is due to the following factors:
Revenues by geographic market, industry group and type of work are as follows:
(1)Effective June 1, 2022, we revised the reporting of our industry groups for the movement of Aerospace & Defense from Communications, Media & Technology to Products. Prior period amounts have been reclassified to conform with the current period presentation.
The following revenues commentary discusses local currency revenue changes for the six months ended February 28, 2023 compared to the six months ended February 28, 2022:
•North America revenues increased 8% in local currency, led by growth in Public Service, Health and Consumer Goods, Retail & Travel Services. Revenue growth was driven by the United States.•Europe revenues increased 15% in local currency, led by growth in Industrial, Banking & Capital Markets and Public Service. Revenue growth was driven by Germany, Italy, France and the United Kingdom.•Growth Markets revenues increased 17% in local currency, led by growth in Banking & Capital Markets, Chemicals & Natural Resources and Public Service. Revenue growth was led by Japan.
Operating expenses for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased $1,508 million, or 6%, compared to the six months ended February 28, 2022, and increased as a percentage of revenues to 85.6% compared to 85.0% during this period. The increase as a percentage of revenues is primarily due to business optimization costs of $244 million recorded during the six months ended February 28, 2023.
Operating expenses by category are as follows:
Cost of services for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased $970 million, or 5%, over the six months ended February 28, 2022, and decreased as a percentage of revenues to 68.3% from 68.5% during this period. Gross margin for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased to 31.7% over 31.5% during the six months ended February 28, 2022. The increase in gross margin was due to lower labor costs, including lower subcontractor costs compared to the same period in fiscal 2022.
Sales and marketing expense for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased $244 million, or 9%, over the six months ended February 28, 2022, and increased as a percentage of revenues to 9.9% over 9.6% during this period due to higher selling and other business development costs.
General and administrative costs for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased $50 million, or 2%, over the six months ended February 28, 2022, and decreased as a percentage of revenues to 6.7% from 6.9%.
During the six months ended February 28, 2023, we recorded business optimization costs of $244 million, primarily for employee severance. For additional information, see Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”
Operating income for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased $42 million, or 1%, over the six months ended February 28, 2022. Operating margin for the six months ended February 28, 2023 was 14.4%, compared with 15.0% for the six months ended February 28, 2022. The business optimization costs decreased operating margin by 80 basis points. Excluding these costs, operating margin for the six months ended February 28, 2023 increased 20 basis points to 15.2%.Operating income and operating margin for each of the geographic markets are as follows:
(1)Costs recorded in connection with our business optimization initiatives, primarily for employee severance.We estimate that the aggregate percentage impact of foreign currency exchange rates on our operating income during the six months ended February 28, 2023 was similar to that disclosed for revenue for each geographic market. In addition, during the six months ended February 28, 2023 each geographic market’s operating income was unfavorably impacted by business optimization costs. The commentary below provides insight into other factors affecting geographic market performance and operating income, including the impact of foreign currency exchange rates where significant, for the six months ended February 28, 2023 compared with the six months ended February 28, 2022:•North America operating income decreased as revenue growth was more than offset by higher labor costs, including an increase in selling and other business development costs as a percentage of revenues.•Europe operating income increased due to revenue growth in local currency, partially offset by the negative impact of foreign currency exchange rates.•Growth Markets operating income increased primarily due to higher contract profitability and revenue growth in local currency, partially offset by the negative impact of foreign currency exchange rates.
Interest income for the six months ended February 28, 2023 was $95 million, an increase of $82 million over the six months ended February 28, 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher interest rates.
Other income (expense), net primarily consists of foreign currency gains and losses, non-operating components of pension expense, as well as gains and losses associated with our investments. During the six months ended February 28, 2023, other income (expense), net increased $35 million over the six months ended February 28, 2022, primarily due to foreign currency exchange losses. For additional information, see Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements."
The effective tax rate for both the six months ended February 28, 2023 and 2022 was 22.0%. The business optimization costs of $244 million and related reduction in tax expense of $52 million did not significantly impact our effective tax rate for the six months ended February 28, 2023. Our provision for income taxes is based on many factors and subject to volatility year to year. We expect the fiscal 2023 annual effective tax rate to be in the range of 22.5% to 24.5%, and adjusted annual effective tax rate, which excludes the tax impacts of business optimization costs and an anticipated investment gain, to be in the range of 23% to 25%. The effective tax rate for interim periods can vary because of the timing of when certain events occur during the year.
Diluted earnings per share were $5.47 for the six months ended February 28, 2023, compared with $5.32 for the six months ended February 28, 2022. The $193 million business optimization costs, net of related taxes, decreased diluted earnings per share by $0.30 during the six months ended February 28, 2023. Excluding this impact, diluted earnings per share were $5.77 for the six months ended February 28, 2023. For information regarding our earnings per share calculations, see Note 3 (Earnings Per Share) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”
The increase in diluted earnings per share is due to the following factors:
As of February 28, 2023, Cash and cash equivalents was $6.2 billion, compared with $7.9 billion as of August 31, 2022. Cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in our Consolidated Cash Flows Statements, are summarized in the following table:
Operating activities: The $139 million increase in operating cash flows was primarily due to higher net income as well as higher collections on net client balances (receivables from clients, contract assets and deferred revenues), partially offset by higher spending on certain compensation payments.Investing activities: The $925 million decrease in cash used was primarily due to lower spending on business acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment. For additional information, see Note 5 (Business Combinations) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”Financing activities: The $86 million increase in cash used was primarily due to an increase in cash dividends paid, partially offset by an increase in net proceeds from share issuances. For additional information, see Note 7 (Shareholders’ Equity) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”We believe that our current and longer-term working capital, investments and other general corporate funding requirements will be satisfied for the next twelve months and thereafter through cash flows from operations and, to the extent necessary, from our borrowing facilities and future financial market activities. Substantially all of our cash is held in jurisdictions where there are no regulatory restrictions or material tax effects on the free flow of funds. Domestic cash inflows for our Irish parent, principally dividend distributions from lower-tier subsidiaries, have been sufficient to meet our historic cash requirements, and we expect this to continue into the future.
As of February 28, 2023, we had the following borrowing facilities, including the issuance of letters of credit, to support general working capital purposes:
Under the borrowing facilities described above, we had an aggregate of $912 million of letters of credit outstanding as of February 28, 2023. We have a short-term commercial paper financing program backed by our $3 billion syndicated credit facility. As of February 28, 2023, we had no commercial paper outstanding.
The Board of Directors of Accenture plc has authorized funding for our publicly announced open-market share purchase program for acquiring Accenture plc Class A ordinary shares and for purchases and redemptions of Accenture plc Class A ordinary shares and Accenture Canada Holdings Inc. exchangeable shares held by current and former members of Accenture Leadership and their permitted transferees. Our share purchase activity during the six months ended February 28, 2023 is as follows:
(1)We conduct a publicly announced open-market share purchase program for Accenture plc Class A ordinary shares. These shares are held as treasury shares by Accenture plc and may be utilized to provide for select employee benefits, such as equity awards to our employees. (2)During the six months ended February 28, 2023, as authorized under our various employee equity share plans, we acquired Accenture plc Class A ordinary shares primarily via share withholding for payroll tax obligations due from employees and former employees in connection with the delivery of Accenture plc Class A ordinary shares under those plans. These purchases of shares in connection with employee share plans do not affect our aggregate available authorization for our publicly announced open-market share purchase and the other share purchase programs. We intend to continue to use a significant portion of cash generated from operations for share repurchases during the remainder of fiscal 2023. The number of shares ultimately repurchased under our open-market share purchase program may vary depending on numerous factors, including, without limitation, share price and other market conditions, our ongoing capital allocation planning, the levels of cash and debt balances, other demands for cash, such as acquisition activity, general economic and/or business conditions, and board and management discretion. Additionally, as these factors may change over the course of the year, the amount of share repurchase activity during any particular period cannot be predicted and may fluctuate from time to time. Share repurchases may be made from time to time through open-market purchases, in respect of purchases and redemptions of Accenture Canada Holdings Inc. exchangeable shares, through the use of Rule 10b5-1 plans and/or by other means. The repurchase program may be accelerated, suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time, without notice.
In the normal course of business and in conjunction with some client engagements, we have entered into contractual arrangements through which we may be obligated to indemnify clients with respect to certain matters. To date, we have not been required to make any significant payment under any of the arrangements described above. For further discussion of these transactions, see Note 10 (Commitments and Contingencies) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”
See Note 1 (Basis of Presentation) to our Consolidated Financial Statements under Item 1, “Financial Statements.”