
Autodesk is changing how the world is designed and made. Our technology spans architecture, engineering, construction, product design, manufacturing, media and entertainment, empowering innovators everywhere to solve challenges big and small. From greener buildings to smarter products to more mesmerizing blockbusters, Autodesk technology helps our customers to design and make a better world for all.Our strategy is to build enduring customer relationships, delivering innovative technology that provides valuable automation and insight into their design and make processes. To drive the execution of our strategy, we are focused on three strategic priorities: deliver a world-class customer experience, catalyze our customers’ digital transformation, and establish an industry-leading platform for Design and Make.We equip and inspire our users with the tailored tools, services, and access they need for success today and tomorrow. At every step, we help users harness the power of data to build upon their ideas and explore new ways of imagining, collaborating, and creating to achieve better outcomes for their customers, for society, and for the world. And because creativity can’t flourish in silos, we connect what matters - from steps in a project to collaborators on a unified platform.Autodesk was founded during the platform transition from mainframe computers and engineering workstations to personal computers. We have developed and sustained a compelling value proposition based on software for the personal computer. Just as the transition from mainframes to personal computers transformed the hardware industry, the software industry has transitioned from developing and selling perpetual licenses and on-premises products to subscriptions and cloud-enabled technologies.
We offer subscriptions for individual products and Industry Collections, enterprise business arrangements (“EBAs”), and cloud service offerings (collectively referred to as “subscription plans”). Subscription plans are designed to give our customers more flexibility with how they use our offerings and to attract a broader range of customers, such as project-based users and small businesses.Our subscription plans represent a hybrid of desktop software and cloud functionality, which provides a device-independent, collaborative design workflow for designers and their stakeholders. Our cloud offerings, for example, BIM 360, Autodesk Build, Fusion 360, ShotGrid, AutoCAD web app, and AutoCAD mobile app, provide tools, including mobile and collaboration capabilities, to streamline design, collaboration, building and manufacturing, and data management processes. We believe that customer adoption of these latest offerings will continue to grow as customers across a range of industries begin to take advantage of the scalable computing power and flexibility provided through these services.Industry Collections provide our customers with access to a broader selection of Autodesk solutions and services, simplifying the customers’ ability to benefit from a complete set of tools for their industry.To support our strategic priority of digital transformation in Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (“AEC”), we are strengthening our AEC solutions’ foundation with both organic and inorganic investments. In fiscal 2023, we acquired a cloud-connected, extended reality (XR) platform enabling AEC professionals to present, collaborate and review projects in immersive and interactive experiences, from anywhere and at any time. This acquisition enables Autodesk to meet increasing needs for augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) technology advancements within the AEC industry and further support AEC customers throughout the project delivery lifecycle. In fiscal 2022, we acquired Storm UK Holdco Limited, the parent of Innovyze, Inc. (“Innovyze”), which provides water infrastructure software. Combining Innovyze’s hydraulic modeling, simulation, asset performance management and operational analytics solutions with Autodesk’s design and analysis solutions (including Autodesk Civil 3D, Autodesk InfraWorks, and the Autodesk Construction Cloud) enables us to deliver end-to-end, cloud-based solutions for our water infrastructure customers that drive efficiency and sustainability. Other acquisitions in fiscal 2022 include a cloud-based estimating solution that enables construction teams to create estimates, perform digital takeoffs, generate detailed reports and proposals and manage bid-day processes. Additionally, in fiscal 2022, we launched Autodesk Tandem, a cloud-based digital twin technology platform that extends digital project delivery by providing owner/operators with an easy to use, accurate, digital as-built model of a newly built or renovated facility. For owner/operators, this accelerates operational readiness and extends the value of BIM downstream into the owner/operator segment.In manufacturing, our strategy is to combine organic and acquired software in existing and adjacent verticals to create end-to-end, cloud-based solutions for our customers that drive efficiency and sustainability. We continue to attract global manufacturing leaders and disruptive startups with our generative design and cloud-based Fusion 360 that converges the design process with manufacturing. In fiscal 2023, we acquired a maker of software for optimizing manufacturing processes with automation and digitization from the shop floor upward that provides a real-time system of record for data collection, management, and analysis. In fiscal 2022, we acquired Upchain, an instant-on, cloud-based data management technology that allows product design and manufacturing customers to collaborate in the cloud across their value chains and bring products to market faster.Our strategy includes improving our product functionality and expanding our product offerings through internal development as well as through the acquisition of products, technology, and businesses. Acquisitions often increase the speed at which we can deliver product functionality to our customers; however, they entail cost and integration challenges and may, in certain instances, negatively impact our operating margins. We continually review these factors in making decisions regarding acquisitions. We anticipate that we will continue to acquire products, technology, and businesses as compelling opportunities become available.
We sell our products and services globally, through a combination of indirect and direct channels. Our direct channels include internal sales resources focused on selling in our largest accounts, our highly specialized solutions, and business transacted through our online Autodesk branded store. Our indirect channels primarily include value added resellers, direct market resellers, distributors, and other software developers. We have entered into transition agreements with certain of our distributors, including Tech Data, to provide transition distribution activities for a one-to-two-year period, with potential extensions.  In connection with the transition agreements, Autodesk intends to increase its selling efforts with value-added resellers and agents.  We recently introduced a new transaction model for our token-based Flex offering whereby customers will still receive ongoing support and services from value added resellers but will transact directly with Autodesk. This new transaction model will be expanded with our token-based Flex offering in North America, and certain countries in EMEA and APAC during fiscal 2024.  See Part I, Item 1, “Financial Statements,” Note 3, “Revenue Recognition” in the Notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail on the results of our indirect and direct channel sales for the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022.We anticipate that our channel mix will continue to change as we scale our business. With the continued growth of our online Autodesk branded store, and the transition to annual billings for multi-year contracts and our new token-based Flex model, we are expanding our transactions with value-added resellers and transacting directly with more end customers without substantial disruption to our revenue. We expect our indirect channel will continue to transact and support a considerable portion of our customers. We also expect our transition to annual billings for multi-year contracts to impact the timing of our billings and cash collections. We employ a variety of incentive programs and promotions to align our direct and indirect channels with our business strategies.One of our key strategies is to maintain an API based architecture of our software products to facilitate third-party development of complementary products and industry-specific software solutions. This approach enables customers and third parties to customize solutions for a wide variety of highly specific uses. We offer several programs that provide strategic investment funding, technological platforms, user communities, technical support, forums, and events to developers who develop add-on applications for our products. For example, we have established the Autodesk Platform Services to support innovators that build solutions to facilitate the development of a single connected ecosystem for the future of how things are designed, made, and used.In addition to the competitive advantages afforded by our technology, our large global network of distributors, resellers, third-party developers, customers, educators, educational institutions, learning partners, and students is a key competitive advantage that has been cultivated over an extensive period. This network of partners and relationships provides us with a broad and deep reach into volume markets worldwide. Our distributor and reseller network is extensive and provides our customers with the resources to purchase, deploy, learn, and support our solutions quickly and easily. We have a significant number of registered third-party developers who create products that work well with our solutions and extend them to a variety of specialized applications.
Autodesk is committed to advancing a more sustainable, resilient, and equitable world. We don’t believe in waiting for progress, we believe in making it. We take action as a business and support our employees, customers, and communities in our collective opportunity to design and make a better world for all.We focus our efforts to advance positive outcomes across three primary areas: energy and materials, health and resilience, and work and prosperity. These impact opportunity areas are derived from the UN Sustainable Development Goals (“SDGs”) and have been focused through a multi-pronged process to align the top needs of our stakeholders, the important issues of our business, and the areas we are best placed to accelerate positive impact at scale.These opportunities manifest as outcomes through how our customers leverage our technology to design and make net-zero carbon buildings, resilient infrastructure, more sustainable products, and a thriving workforce. We realize these opportunities through powering our business with 100% renewable energy, neutralizing greenhouse gas emissions and developing an inclusive culture. We advance these opportunities with industry innovators through collaboration, philanthropic capital, software donations, and training.The Autodesk Foundation (the “Foundation”), a privately funded 501(c)(3) charity organization established and solely funded by us, leads our philanthropic efforts. The purpose of the Foundation is twofold: to support employees to make a better world by matching employees’ volunteer time and/or donations to nonprofit organizations; and to support organizations using design to drive positive social and environmental impact. On our behalf, the Foundation also administers a discounted software donation program to nonprofit organizations, social and environmental entrepreneurs, and others who are developing design solutions that will shape a more sustainable future.Additional information about our environmental, social, and governance program is available in our annual impact report on our website at www.autodesk.com. Information contained on or accessible through our website is not part of or incorporated by reference into this report.
Our strategy depends upon many assumptions, including: making our technology available to mainstream markets; leveraging our large global network of distributors, resellers, agents, third-party developers, customers, educators, educational institutions, learning partners, and students; improving the performance and functionality of our products and platform; and adequately protecting our intellectual property. If the outcome of any of these assumptions differs from our expectations, we may not be able to implement our strategy, which could potentially adversely affect our business. For further discussion regarding these and related risks, see Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). In preparing our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, we make assumptions, judgments, and estimates that can have a significant impact on amounts reported in our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis.  We base our assumptions, judgments, and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies are described in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” Note 1, “Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2023.  An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably possible could materially impact the financial statements.  We highlighted those policies that involve a higher degree of judgment and complexity with further discussion in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” in our Form 10-K. There have been no material changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates during the three months ended April 30, 2023, as compared to those disclosed in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2023.  We believe these policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
•Total net revenue increased 8% to $1,269 million for the three months ended April 30, 2023, compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year.•Recurring revenue as a percentage of net revenue was 98% for both the three months ended April 30, 2023, and 2022.•Net revenue retention rate (“NR3”) was within the range of 100% and 110%, on a constant currency basis, for both the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022.•Deferred revenue was $4.48 billion, a decrease of 2% compared to the fourth quarter in the prior fiscal year. •Remaining performance obligations (short-term and long-term deferred revenue plus unbilled deferred revenue) (“RPO”) was $5.39 billion, a decrease of 4% compared to the fourth quarter in the prior fiscal year. •Current remaining performance obligations was $3.51 billion, flat compared to the fourth quarter in the prior fiscal year.
With a more challenging macroeconomic environment, foreign exchange rate fluctuations and the decline in operations in Russia, net revenue increased 8% during the three months ended April 30, 2023, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year, primarily due to a 10% increase in subscription revenue, partially offset by a 22% decrease in maintenance revenue.  New subscription growth decelerated while renewal rates improved quarter over quarter such that current remaining performance obligations grew 12%, the same rate as for the three months ended January 31, 2023. For further discussion of the drivers of these results, see below under the heading “Results of Operations.” We rely significantly upon major distributors and resellers in both the U.S. and international regions, including Tech Data Corporation and its global affiliates (collectively, “Tech Data”) and Ingram Micro Inc. (“Ingram Micro”).  Total sales to Tech Data accounted for 40% and 36% of our total net revenue for the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022, respectively.  Ingram Micro accounted for 8% and 9% of Autodesk's total net revenue during the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Our customers through Tech Data and Ingram Micro are the resellers and end users who purchase our software subscriptions and services. We entered into transition agreements with certain of our distributors, including Tech Data and Ingram Micro, to provide transition distribution activities for a one-to-two-year period, with potential extensions.  In connection with the transition agreements, we intend to increase our selling efforts with value-added resellers and agents.  Consequently, we believe our business is not substantially dependent on Tech Data or Ingram Micro.
In order to help better understand our financial performance, we use several key performance metrics including recurring revenue and NR3. These metrics are key performance metrics and should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue as these metrics are not intended to be combined with those items. We use these metrics to monitor the strength of our recurring business. We believe these metrics are useful to investors because they can help in monitoring the long-term health of our business. Our determination and presentation of these metrics may differ from that of other companies. The presentation of these metrics is meant to be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for or in isolation from, our financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.  Please refer to the Glossary of Terms for the definitions of these metrics.The following table outlines our recurring revenue metric for the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022:
(1)The acquisition of a business may cause variability in the comparison of recurring revenue in this table above and recurring revenue derived from the revenue reported in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations.NR3 was within the range of 100% and 110%, on a constant currency basis, for both the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022.
We generate a significant amount of our revenue in the United States, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom and Finland.
The following table shows the impact of foreign exchange rate changes on our net revenue and total spend:
(1)Please refer to the Glossary of Terms for the definitions of our constant currency growth rates. Changes in the value of the U.S. dollar may have a significant effect on net revenue, total spend, and income from operations in future periods. We use foreign currency contracts to reduce the exchange rate effect on a portion of the net revenue of certain anticipated transactions but do not attempt to completely mitigate the impact of fluctuations of such foreign currency against the U.S. dollar.
RPO represents deferred revenue and contractually stated or committed orders under early renewal and multi-year billing plans for subscription, services, license, and maintenance for which the associated deferred revenue has not yet been recognized. Unbilled deferred revenue is not included as a receivable or deferred revenue on our Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Part I, Item 1, “Financial Statements,” Note 3, “Revenue Recognition,” for more details on Autodesk's performance obligations.
RPO consisted of the following:
We expect that the amount of RPO will change from quarter to quarter for several reasons, including the specific timing, duration, and size of customer subscription and support agreements, the specific timing of customer renewals, and foreign currency fluctuations. Historically, we have had increased EBA sales activity in our fourth fiscal quarter and this seasonality may affect the relative value of our billings, RPO, and collections in the fourth and first fiscal quarters. As customers transition from multi-year subscription contracts billed upfront to annual billing installments some customers may choose annual contracts instead. If this were to occur, we would expect it to proportionately reduce the unbilled portion of our total remaining performance obligations and would expect it to negatively impact total RPO growth rates. Deferred revenue, billings, current RPO, revenue, Non-GAAP operating margin, and free cash flow would remain broadly unchanged in this scenario.
At April 30, 2023, we had $2.32 billion in cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities. Our cash flow from operations increased to $723 million for the three months ended April 30, 2023, compared to $434 million for the three months ended April 30, 2022. We repurchased 2,666 thousand shares of our common stock for $534 million during the three months ended April 30, 2023. Comparatively, we repurchased 2,058 thousand shares of our common stock for $436 million during the three months ended April 30, 2022. See further discussion regarding the balance sheet and cash flow activities under the heading “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
We believe our investment in cloud products and a subscription business model, backed by a strong balance sheet, give us a robust foundation to successfully navigate complex geopolitical and global macro-economic challenges. However, supply chain disruption and resulting inflationary pressures, higher interest rates, a global labor shortage, the war in Ukraine, and foreign exchange rate fluctuations, may impact our outlook. We also expect our transition to annual billings for multi-year contracts to impact the timing of our billings and cash collections. The extent of the impact of these risks on our business in the remainder of fiscal 2024 and beyond will depend on several factors, some of which are out of our control. Further discussion of the potential impacts of these risks on our business can be found in Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.”
Subscription revenue consists of our term-based product subscriptions, cloud service offerings, and flexible EBAs. Revenue from these arrangements is predominately recognized ratably over the contract term commencing with the date our service is made available to customers and when all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied.Maintenance revenue consists of renewal fees for existing maintenance plan agreements that were initially purchased with a perpetual software license. Under our maintenance plan, customers are eligible to receive unspecified upgrades, when and if available, and technical support. We recognize maintenance revenue ratably over the term of the agreements, which is generally one year. Other revenue consists of revenue from consulting, training, and other products and services, and is recognized as the products are delivered and services are performed.
Our product offerings are focused in four primary product families: Architecture, Engineering and Construction (“AEC”), AutoCAD and AutoCAD LT, Manufacturing (“MFG”), and Media and Entertainment (“M&E”).
(1) During fiscal 2023, we corrected an immaterial classification error and reclassified certain revenue amounts between Architecture, Engineering and Construction and AutoCAD and AutoCAD LT.  The results for the fiscal quarter ended April 30, 2022 have been adjusted to conform to the current period presentation.  These reclassifications did not impact total net revenue.
*        Constant currency data not provided at this level. We believe that international revenue will continue to comprise a majority of our net revenue. Unfavorable economic conditions, including in connection with the significant military action against Ukraine launched by Russia (and any related political or economic responses and counter-responses or otherwise by various global actors or the general effect on the global economy), in the countries that contribute a significant portion of our net revenue, including in emerging economies such as Brazil, India, and China, has had and may continue to have an adverse effect on our business in those countries and our overall financial performance. Changes in the value of the U.S. dollar relative to other currencies have significantly affected, and could continue to significantly affect, our financial results for a given period even though we hedge a portion of our current and projected revenue. Increases to the levels of political and economic unpredictability or protectionism in the global market may impact our future financial results.
We anticipate that our revenue by direct sales channel will continue to increase as a percentage of total net revenue with the continued growth of our online Autodesk branded store, expanding our token-based Flex offering transactions with value-added resellers, and transacting directly with more end customers.
Cost of subscription and maintenance revenue includes the labor costs of providing product support to our subscription and maintenance customers, SaaS vendor costs and allocated IT costs, facilities costs, professional services fees related to operating our network and cloud infrastructure, royalties, depreciation expense and operating lease payments associated with computer equipment, data center costs, salaries, related expenses of network operations, stock-based compensation expense, and gains and losses on our operating expense cash flow hedges.Cost of other revenue includes labor costs associated with product setup, costs of consulting and training services contracts, and collaborative project management services contracts. Cost of other revenue also includes stock-based compensation expense, overhead charges, allocated IT and facilities costs, professional services fees, and gains and losses on our operating expense cash flow hedges.Cost of revenue, at least over the near term, is affected by labor costs, hosting costs for our cloud offerings, the volume and mix of product sales, fluctuations in consulting costs, amortization of developed technology, new customer support offerings, royalty rates for licensed technology embedded in our products, stock-based compensation expense, and gains and losses on our operating expense cash flow hedges.Marketing and sales expenses include salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for our marketing and sales employees, the expense of travel, entertainment, and training for such personnel, sales and dealer commissions, and the costs of programs aimed at increasing revenue, such as advertising, trade shows and expositions, and various sales and promotional programs. Marketing and sales expenses also include SaaS vendor costs and allocated IT costs, payment processing fees, the cost of supplies and equipment, gains and losses on our operating expense cash flow hedges, facilities costs, and labor costs associated with sales and order management.Research and development expenses, which are expensed as incurred, consist primarily of salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for research and development employees, the expense of travel, entertainment, and training for such personnel, professional services such as fees paid to software development firms and independent contractors, SaaS vendor costs and allocated IT costs, gains and losses on our operating expense cash flow hedges, and facilities costs.General and administrative expenses include salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense for our CEO, finance, human resources, and legal employees, as well as professional fees for legal and accounting services, SaaS vendor costs and net IT costs, certain foreign business taxes, gains and losses on our operating expense cash flow hedges, expense of travel, entertainment, and training, facilities costs, acquisition-related costs, and the cost of supplies and equipment.
The following table highlights our expectation for the absolute dollar change and percent of revenue change between the second quarter of fiscal 2024, as compared to the second quarter of fiscal 2023:
The following table sets forth the components of interest and other income (expense), net:
Interest and other income, net, increased by $23 million during the three months ended April 30, 2023, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year. The increase in the three months ended April 30, 2023, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year was primarily due to an increase in interest income, gains in the current period as compared to losses in the prior year period for investments in debt and equity securities that are held in a rabbi trust under non-qualified deferred compensation plans, offset by a decrease in gains on foreign currency.Interest expense and investment income fluctuates based on average cash, marketable securities, debt balances, average maturities, and interest rates. Gains and losses on foreign currency are primarily due to the impact of re-measuring foreign currency transactions and net monetary assets into the functional currency of the corresponding entity. The amount of the gain or loss on foreign currency is driven by the volume of foreign currency transactions and the foreign currency exchange rates for the period.
We account for income taxes and the related accounts under the liability method. Deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities, using enacted rates expected to be in effect during the year in which the basis differences reverse.We had an income tax expense of $60 million, relative to pre-tax income of $221 million for the three months ended April 30, 2023, and an income tax expense of $49 million, relative to pre-tax income of $195 million for the three months ended April 30, 2022. Income tax expense for the three months ended April 30, 2023, reflects  a reduced U.S. foreign derived intangible income benefit, increased tax expense from foreign currency adjustments from foreign branches, and a reduced tax expense relating to stock-based compensation.The U.S. Tax Cut and Jobs Act (“Tax Act”)  enacted on December 22, 2017 eliminates the option to deduct research and development expenditures and requires taxpayers to capitalize and amortize such expenditures over five or fifteen years beginning in fiscal 2023.  Although Congress is considering legislation that would defer the capitalization and amortization requirement, there is no assurance that the provision will be repealed or otherwise modified.We regularly assess the need for a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. In making that assessment, we consider both positive and negative evidence related to the likelihood of realization of the deferred tax assets to determine, based on the weight of available evidence, whether it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have maintained a valuation allowance on all or part of our Netherlands, Australia, California, Michigan deferred tax assets, as well as our U.S. capital loss deferred tax assets as it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.As we continually strive to optimize our overall business model, tax planning strategies may become feasible and prudent allowing us to realize many of the deferred tax assets that are offset by a valuation allowance; therefore, we will continue to evaluate the ability to utilize the deferred tax assets each quarter, both in the U.S. and in foreign jurisdictions, based on all available evidence, both positive and negative.As of April 30, 2023, we had $227 million of gross unrecognized tax benefits, of which $189 million would impact the effective tax rate, if recognized. The remaining $38 million would reduce our valuation allowance, if recognized. The amount of unrecognized tax benefits will decrease in the next twelve months for statute lapse of approximately $4 million.We anticipate that the U.S. Department of Treasury will continue to interpret or issue guidance on how provisions of the Tax Act will be applied or otherwise administered. As future guidance is issued, we may adjust the amounts that we have previously recorded that may materially impact our financial statements.Our future effective annual tax rate may be materially impacted by the amount of benefits and charges from tax amounts associated with our foreign earnings that are taxed at rates different from the federal statutory rate, changes in valuation allowances, level of profit before tax, accounting for uncertain tax positions, business combinations, closure of statute of limitations or settlement of tax audits, and changes in tax laws. A significant amount of our earnings are generated by our European and Asia Pacific subsidiaries. Our future effective tax rates may be adversely affected to the extent earnings are lower than anticipated in countries where we have lower statutory tax rates. Signed into law on August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act contains many revisions to the Internal Revenue Code effective in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2022, including a 15% corporate minimum income tax. Autodesk continues to monitor the impact of the Inflation Reduction Act on our consolidated financial statements.
In addition to our results determined under GAAP discussed above, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance. For the three months ended April 30, 2023 and 2022, our gross profit, income from operations, operating margin, net income, and diluted net income per share on a GAAP and non-GAAP basis were as follows (in millions except for operating margin and per share data):
For our internal budgeting and resource allocation process and as a means to provide consistency in period-to-period comparisons, we use non-GAAP measures to supplement our condensed consolidated financial statements presented on a GAAP basis. These non-GAAP measures do not include certain items that may have a material impact upon our reported financial results. We also use non-GAAP measures in making operating decisions because we believe those measures provide meaningful supplemental information regarding our earning potential and performance for management by excluding certain benefits, credits, expenses, and charges that may not be indicative of our core business operating results.  For the reasons set forth below, we believe these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors both because (1) they allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in its financial and operational decision-making and (2) they are used by our institutional investors and the analyst community to help them analyze the health of our business. This allows investors and others to better understand and evaluate our operating results and future prospects in the same manner as management, compare financial results across accounting periods and to those of peer companies, and to better understand the long-term performance of our core business. We also use some of these measures for purposes of determining company-wide incentive compensation. There are limitations in using non-GAAP financial measures because non-GAAP financial measures are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. The non-GAAP financial measures included above are limited in value because they exclude certain items that may have a material impact upon our reported financial results. In addition, they are subject to inherent limitations as they reflect the exercise of judgments by management about which charges are excluded from the non-GAAP financial measures. We compensate for these limitations by analyzing current and future results on a GAAP basis as well as a non-GAAP basis and also by providing GAAP measures in our public disclosures. The presentation of non-GAAP financial information is meant to be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for or in isolation from, the directly comparable financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. We urge investors to review the reconciliation of our non-GAAP financial measures to the comparable GAAP financial measures included below, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
(In millions except for operating margin and per share data):
(1)Totals may not sum due to rounding.Our non-GAAP financial measures may exclude the following, as applicable:Stock-based compensation expenses. We exclude stock-based compensation expenses from non-GAAP measures primarily because they are non-cash expenses and management finds it useful to exclude certain non-cash charges to assess the appropriate level of various operating expenses to assist in budgeting, planning, and forecasting future periods.  Moreover, because of varying available valuation methodologies, subjective assumptions, and the variety of award types that companies can use under FASB ASC Topic 718, we believe excluding stock-based compensation expenses allows investors to make meaningful comparisons between our recurring core business operating results and those of other companies.Amortization of developed technologies and purchased intangibles. We incur amortization of acquisition-related developed technologies and purchased intangibles in connection with acquisitions of certain businesses and technologies. Amortization of developed technologies and purchased intangibles is inconsistent in amount and frequency and is significantly affected by the timing and size of our acquisitions. Management finds it useful to exclude these variable charges from our cost of revenues to assist in budgeting, planning, and forecasting future periods. Investors should note that the use of intangible assets contributed to our revenues earned during the periods presented and will contribute to our future period revenues as well. Amortization of developed technologies and purchased intangible assets will recur in future periods.CEO transition costs. We exclude amounts paid to our former CEOs upon departure under the terms of their transition agreements, including severance payments, acceleration of restricted stock units, and continued vesting of performance stock units, and legal fees incurred with the transition. Also excluded from our non-GAAP measures are recruiting costs related to the search for a new CEO. These costs represent non-recurring expenses and are not indicative of our ongoing operating expenses. We further believe that excluding the CEO transition costs from our non-GAAP results is useful to investors in that it allows for period-over-period comparability.Goodwill impairment. This is a non-cash charge to write down goodwill to fair value when there was an indication that the asset was impaired. As explained above, management finds it useful to exclude certain non-cash charges to assess the appropriate level of various operating expenses to assist in budgeting, planning, and forecasting future periods.Restructuring and other exit costs, net. These expenses are associated with realigning our business strategies based on current economic conditions. In connection with these restructuring actions or other exit actions, we recognize costs related to termination benefits for former employees whose positions were eliminated, the closure of facilities, and cancellation of certain contracts. We exclude these charges because these expenses are not reflective of ongoing business and operating results. We believe it is useful for investors to understand the effects of these items on our total operating expenses. Lease-related asset impairments and other charges.  These charges are associated with the optimization of our facilities costs related to leases for facilities that we have recently vacated as a result of our one-time move to a more hybrid remote workforce. In connection with these facility leases, we recognize costs related to the impairment or abandonment of operating lease right-of-use assets, computer equipment, furniture, and leasehold improvements, and other costs. We exclude these charges because these expenses are not reflective of ongoing business and operating results. We believe it is useful for investors to understand the effects of these items on our total operating expenses.Acquisition-related costs. We exclude certain acquisition-related costs, including due diligence costs, professional fees in connection with an acquisition, certain financing costs, and certain integration-related expenses. These expenses are unpredictable, and dependent on factors that may be outside of our control and unrelated to the continuing operations of the acquired business or our Company. In addition, the size and complexity of an acquisition, which often drives the magnitude of acquisition-related costs, may not be indicative of such future costs. We believe excluding acquisition-related costs facilitates the comparison of our financial results to our historical operating results and to other companies in our industry.Loss (gain) on strategic investments and dispositions. We exclude gains and losses related to our strategic investments and dispositions of strategic investments, purchased intangibles, and businesses from our non-GAAP measures primarily because management finds it useful to exclude these variable gains and losses on these investments and dispositions in assessing our financial results. Included in these amounts are non-cash unrealized gains and losses on the derivative components, dividends received, realized gains and losses on the sales or losses on the impairment of these investments, and gain and loss on dispositions. We believe excluding these items is useful to investors because these excluded items do not correlate to the underlying performance of our business and these losses or gains were incurred in connection with strategic investments and dispositions which do not occur regularly. Discrete tax provision items. We exclude the GAAP tax provision, including discrete items, from the non-GAAP measure of net income (loss), and include a non-GAAP tax provision based upon the projected annual non-GAAP effective tax rate. Discrete tax items include income tax expenses or benefits that do not relate to ordinary income from continuing operations in the current fiscal year, unusual or infrequently occurring items, or the tax impact of certain stock-based compensation. Examples of discrete tax items include, but are not limited to, certain changes in judgment and changes in estimates of tax matters related to prior fiscal years, certain costs related to business combinations, certain changes in the realizability of deferred tax assets, or changes in tax law. Management believes this approach assists investors in understanding the tax provision and the effective tax rate related to ongoing operations. We believe the exclusion of these discrete tax items provides investors with useful supplemental information about our operational performance.Establishment (release) of a valuation allowance on certain net deferred tax assets. This is a non-cash charge to record or to release a valuation allowance on certain deferred tax assets. As explained above, management finds it useful to exclude certain non-cash charges to assess the appropriate level of various cash expenses to assist in budgeting, planning, and forecasting future periods.Income tax effects on the difference between GAAP and non-GAAP costs and expenses. The income tax effects that are excluded from the non-GAAP measures relate to the tax impact on the difference between GAAP and non-GAAP expenses, primarily due to stock-based compensation, amortization of purchased intangibles, and restructuring charges and other exit costs (benefits) for GAAP and non-GAAP measures.
Our primary source of cash is from the sale of our software and related services. Our primary use of cash is payment of our operating costs, which consist primarily of employee-related expenses, such as compensation and benefits, as well as general operating expenses for marketing, facilities, and overhead costs. Long-term cash requirements for items other than normal operating expenses are anticipated for the following: the acquisition of businesses, software products, or technologies complementary to our business; repayment of debt; common stock repurchases; and capital expenditures, including the purchase and implementation of internal-use software applications.At April 30, 2023, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities totaling $2.32 billion and net accounts receivable of $331 million.In November 2022, Autodesk entered into an amended and restated credit agreement (“Credit Agreement”) by and among Autodesk, the lenders party thereto, and Citibank, N.A., as agent, that provides for a revolving credit facility in the aggregate principal amount of $1.5 billion with an option to be increased up to $2.0 billion. The revolving credit facility is available for working capital or other business needs. The maturity date on the Credit Agreement is September 30, 2026.  At April 30, 2023, Autodesk had no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Agreement. Additionally, as of June 1, 2023, we have no amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement. See Part I, Item 1, “Financial Statements,” Note 13, “Borrowing Arrangements,” in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on our covenant requirements and recent amendments to the Credit Agreement.  If we are unable to remain in compliance with the covenants under the Credit Agreement, we will not be able to draw on our revolving credit facility.As of April 30, 2023, we have $2.30 billion aggregate principal amount of notes outstanding.  See Part I, Item 1,
Our cash and cash equivalents are held by diversified financial institutions globally. Our primary commercial banking relationship is with Citigroup and its global affiliates. In addition, Citibank N.A., an affiliate of Citigroup, is one of the lead lenders and agent in the syndicate of our $1.5 billion revolving credit facility. Our cash and cash equivalents balances are concentrated in a few locations around the world, with substantial amounts held outside of the United States. As of April 30, 2023, approximately 75% of our total cash or cash equivalents are located in foreign jurisdictions and that percentage will fluctuate subject to business needs. There are several factors that can impact our ability to utilize foreign cash balances, such as foreign exchange restrictions, foreign regulatory restrictions, or adverse tax costs. As a result, earnings in foreign jurisdictions are generally available for distribution to the United States with little to no incremental U.S. taxes. We regularly review our capital structure and consider a variety of potential financing alternatives and planning strategies to ensure we have the proper liquidity available in the locations in which it is needed. We expect to meet our liquidity needs through or in combination of current cash balances, ongoing cash flows, and external borrowings.Cash from operations could also be affected by various risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks detailed in Part II, Item 1A titled “Risk Factors.”  Based on our current business plan and revenue prospects, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, our anticipated cash flows from operations, and our available revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and operating resource expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.  Our revenue, earnings, cash flows, receivables, and payables are subject to fluctuations due to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, for which we have put in place foreign currency contracts as part of our risk management strategy. See Part I, Item 3, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” for further discussion.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $723 million for the three months ended April 30, 2023, primarily consisted of $161 million of our net income adjusted for $157 million non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense, and depreciation, amortization, and accretion expense, and deferred income tax.  Cash provided by working capital increased due to the change in accounts receivable of $630 million due to the seasonality of our billings in the fourth fiscal quarter and timing of cash collections from customers offset in part by the change in accounts payable and other liabilities of $168 million primarily due to the timing of payments related to employee compensation and related costs and a decrease in deferred revenue of $98 million due to the timing of our billing installments and seasonality of billings in the fourth fiscal quarter .Net cash provided by operating activities of $434 million for the three months ended April 30, 2022, primarily consisted of $146 million of our net income adjusted for $197 million  non-cash items such as stock-based compensation expense, and depreciation, amortization, and accretion expense, lease-related impairment charges, and deferred income tax. The increase in cash provided by working capital was primarily due to a decrease in accounts receivable of $332 million due to the seasonality of our billings in the fourth fiscal quarter and timing of cash collections from customers offset in part by a decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities of $218 million due to the timing of payments related to employee compensation and related costs.Net cash used in investing activities was $230 million for the three months ended April 30, 2023, primarily due to purchases of marketable securities partially offset by the sales and maturities of marketable securities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $31 million for the three months ended April 30, 2022, primarily due to the sales and maturities of marketable securities partially offset by business combinations, net of cash acquired. Net cash used in financing activities was $523 million and $460 million for the three months ended April 30, 2023 and  2022, respectively, primarily due to repurchases of common stock.
Autodesk's stock repurchase programs provide Autodesk with the ability to offset the dilution from the issuance of stock under our employee stock plans and reduce shares outstanding over time, and has the effect of returning excess cash generated from our business to stockholders. Under the share repurchase programs, Autodesk may repurchase shares from time to time in open market transactions, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase programs, tender offers, or by other means.  The share repurchase programs do not have an expiration date and the pace and timing of repurchases will depend on factors such as cash generation from operations, available surplus, the volume of employee stock plan activity, remaining shares or dollar amount available in the authorized pool, cash requirements for acquisitions, cash requirements to retire outstanding debt, economic and market conditions, stock price, and legal and regulatory requirements.The following table provides information about the repurchase of common stock in open-market transactions during the three months ended April 30, 2023:
(1)This represents shares purchased in open-market transactions under the stock repurchase plans approved by the Board of Directors.(2)These amounts correspond to the plan publicly announced and approved by the Board of Directors in September 2016 and November 2022 that authorized the repurchase of 30 million shares and $5 billion, respectively. At April 30, 2023, 2 thousand shares and $5 billion remained available for repurchase under the September 2016 and November 2022 repurchase program approved by the Board of Directors, respectively.  The plans do not have a fixed expiration date. See Part I, Item 1, “Financial Statements,” Note 17, “Stockholders' Equity,” in the Notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Billings: Total revenue plus the net change in deferred revenue from the beginning to the end of the period.Cloud Service Offerings: Represents individual term-based offerings deployed through web browser technologies or in a hybrid software and cloud configuration. Cloud service offerings that are bundled with other product offerings are not captured as a separate cloud service offering.Constant Currency (CC) Growth Rates: We attempt to represent the changes in the underlying business operations by eliminating fluctuations caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates as well as eliminating hedge gains or losses recorded within the current and comparative periods. We calculate constant currency growth rates by (i) applying the applicable prior period exchange rates to current period results and (ii) excluding any gains or losses from foreign currency hedge contracts that are reported in the current and comparative periods. Design Business: Represents the combination of maintenance, product subscriptions, and all EBAs. Main products include, but are not limited to, AutoCAD, AutoCAD LT, Industry Collections, Revit, Inventor, Maya and 3ds Max. Certain products, such as our computer aided manufacturing solutions, incorporate both Design and Make functionality and are classified as Design. Enterprise Business Agreements (EBAs): Represents programs providing enterprise customers with token-based access to a broad pool of Autodesk products over a defined contract term.Flex:  A pay-as-you-go consumption option to pre-purchase tokens to access any product available with Flex for a daily rate.Free Cash Flow: Cash flow from operating activities minus capital expenditures.Industry Collections: Autodesk Industry Collections are a combination of products and services that target a specific user objective and support a set of workflows for that objective. Our Industry Collections consist of: Autodesk Architecture, Engineering and Construction Collection, Autodesk Product Design and Manufacturing Collection, and Autodesk Media and Entertainment Collection.Maintenance Plan: Our maintenance plans provide our customers with a cost effective and predictable budgetary option to obtain the productivity benefits of our new releases and enhancements when and if released during the term of their contracts. Under our maintenance plans, customers are eligible to receive unspecified upgrades when and if available, and technical support. We recognize maintenance revenue over the term of the agreements, generally one year.   Make Business: Represents certain cloud-based product subscriptions. Main products include, but are not limited to, Assemble, Autodesk Build, BuildingConnected, Fusion 360 and ShotGrid. Certain products, such as Fusion 360, incorporate both Design and Make functionality and are classified as Make.Net Revenue Retention Rate (NR3): Measures the year-over-year change in Recurring Revenue for the population of customers that existed one year ago (“base customers”).  Net revenue retention rate is calculated by dividing the current quarter Recurring Revenue related to base customers by the total corresponding quarter Recurring Revenue from one year ago. Recurring Revenue is based on USD reported revenue, and fluctuations caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates and hedge gains or losses have not been eliminated. Recurring Revenue related to acquired companies, one year after acquisition, has been captured as existing customers until such data conforms to the calculation methodology. This may cause variability in the comparison.Other Revenue: Consists of revenue from consulting, training, and other products and services, and is recognized as the products are delivered and services are performed.  Product Subscription: Provides customers a flexible, cost-effective way to access and manage 3D design, engineering, and entertainment software tools. Our product subscriptions currently represent a hybrid of desktop and cloud functionality, which provides a device-independent, collaborative design workflow for designers and their stakeholders. Recurring Revenue: Consists of the revenue for the period from our traditional maintenance plans, our subscription plan offerings, and certain Other revenue. It excludes subscription revenue related to third-party products. Recurring revenue acquired with the acquisition of a business is captured when total subscriptions are captured in our systems and may cause variability in the comparison of this calculation.     Remaining Performance Obligations (RPO): The sum of total short-term, long-term, and unbilled deferred revenue. Current remaining performance obligations is the amount of revenue we expect to recognize in the next twelve months.   Spend: The sum of cost of revenue and operating expenses. Subscription Plan: Comprises our term-based product subscriptions, cloud service offerings, and EBAs. Subscriptions represent a combined hybrid offering of desktop software and cloud functionality which provides a device-independent, collaborative design workflow for designers and their stakeholders. With subscription, customers can use our software anytime, anywhere, and get access to the latest updates to previous versions.   Subscription Revenue: Includes our cloud-enabled term-based product subscriptions, cloud service offerings, and flexible EBAs. Unbilled Deferred Revenue: Unbilled deferred revenue represents contractually stated or committed orders under early renewal and multi-year billing plans for subscription, services, and maintenance for which the associated deferred revenue has not been recognized. Under FASB Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 606, unbilled deferred revenue is not included as a receivable or deferred revenue on our Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheet.