
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements contained in this Form 10-Q, as well as Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and Risk Factors contained in the Form 10-K. We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements. The discussion also provides information about the financial results of our business segments to provide a better understanding of how those segments and their results affect the financial condition and results of operations of Ameren as a whole. Also see the Glossary of Terms and Abbreviations at the front of this report and in the Form 10-K.Ameren, headquartered in St. Louis, Missouri, is a public utility holding company whose primary assets are its equity interests in its subsidiaries. Ameren’s subsidiaries are separate, independent legal entities with separate businesses, assets, and liabilities. Dividends on Ameren’s common stock and the payment of expenses by Ameren depend on distributions made to it by its subsidiaries. Ameren’s principal subsidiaries are listed below. Ameren has other subsidiaries that conduct other activities, such as providing shared services.•Ameren Missouri operates a rate-regulated electric generation, transmission, and distribution business and a rate-regulated natural gas distribution business in Missouri.•Ameren Illinois operates rate-regulated electric transmission, electric distribution, and natural gas distribution businesses in Illinois.•ATXI operates a FERC rate-regulated electric transmission business in the MISO.Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s financial statements are prepared on a consolidated basis and therefore include the accounts of their majority-owned subsidiaries. All intercompany transactions have been eliminated. Ameren Missouri’s subsidiaries were created for the ownership of renewable generation projects. Ameren Illinois has no subsidiaries. All tabular dollar amounts are in millions, unless otherwise indicated.In addition to presenting results of operations and earnings amounts in total, we present certain information in cents per share. These amounts reflect factors that directly affect Ameren’s earnings. We believe this per share information helps readers to understand the impact of these factors on Ameren’s earnings per share.
Net income attributable to Ameren common shareholders in the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $264 million, or $1.00 per diluted share, compared with $252 million, or $0.97 per diluted share, in the year-ago period. Net income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was favorably affected by increased rate base investments across all segments, a higher recognized ROE at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, and decreased other operations and maintenance expenses not subject to formula rates, riders, or trackers, including an increase in the cash surrender value of COLI. Net income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, was unfavorably affected by decreased electric retail sales at Ameren Missouri, primarily resulting from warmer winter temperatures experienced in 2023, and increased financing costs from the issuance of long-term debt at Ameren Missouri and higher interest rates on short-term borrowings.Ameren’s strategic plan includes investing in rate-regulated energy infrastructure, enhancing regulatory frameworks and advocating for responsible policies, and optimizing operating performance to capitalize on opportunities to benefit our customers, our shareholders, and the environment. Ameren remains focused on disciplined cost management and strategic capital allocation. Ameren invested $0.9 billion in its rate-regulated businesses in the three months ended March 31, 2023.In April 2023, Ameren Missouri, the MoPSC staff, the MoOPC, and certain intervenors filed a nonunanimous stipulation and agreement with the MoPSC to increase Ameren Missouri’s annual revenues for electric service by $140 million. The remaining intervenors did not object to the agreement. The stipulation and agreement, which is subject to MoPSC approval, did not specify an allowed ROE, capital structure, rate base, or any rate base disallowances. The stipulation and agreement includes the continued use of the FAC and trackers for pension and postretirement benefits, uncertain income tax positions, certain excess deferred income taxes, and renewable energy standard costs that the MoPSC previously authorized in earlier electric rate orders, as well as the use of an electric property tax tracker. It also includes a tracker for future production and investment tax credits and proceeds from the sale of tax credits allowed under the IRA. A decision by the MoPSC on the nonunanimous stipulation and agreement is expected by June 2023, with new rates expected to take effect on July 1, 2023.In April 2023, the MoPSC issued an order approving a requested CCN for the Boomtown Solar Project. In February 2023, the MoPSC issued an order approving a nonunanimous stipulation and agreement regarding a requested CCN for the Huck Finn Solar Project. In 2022, Ameren Missouri entered into an engineering, supply, and construction agreement to construct the Vandalia Solar Project, a 50-MW solar generation facility expected to be located in central Missouri and support Ameren Missouri’s transition to renewable generation. Ameren Missouri expects to construct the Vandalia Solar Project after obtaining a CCN from the MoPSC, which it expects to file by mid-2023.In March 2023, Ameren Missouri filed a proposed customer energy-efficiency plan with the MoPSC under the MEEIA. This filing proposed a three-year plan, which includes a portfolio of customer energy-efficiency programs, along with the continued use of the MEEIA rider, which allows Ameren Missouri to collect from, or refund to, customers any difference in actual MEEIA program costs and related lost electric margins and the amounts collected from customers. If the plan is approved, Ameren Missouri intends to invest $122 million annually in the proposed customer energy-efficiency programs from 2024 to 2026. In addition, Ameren Missouri requested performance incentives applicable to each plan year to earn additional revenues by achieving certain customer energy-efficiency and target spending goals. If 100% of the goals are achieved, Ameren Missouri would earn additional revenues totaling $55 million over the three-year plan. Ameren Missouri also requested additional performance incentives applicable to each plan year totaling up to $14 million over the three-year plan, if Ameren Missouri exceeds 100% of the goals. The MoPSC is under no deadline to issue an order in this proceeding.In February 2023, Ameren Missouri filed an update to its Smart Energy Plan with the MoPSC, which includes a five-year capital investment overview with a detailed one-year plan for 2023. The plan is designed to upgrade Ameren Missouri’s electric infrastructure and includes investments that will upgrade the grid and accommodate more renewable energy. Investments under the plan are expected to total approximately $9.9 billion over the five-year period from 2023 through 2027, with expenditures largely recoverable under the PISA and the RESRAM. Ameren Missouri’s Smart Energy Plan excludes investments in its natural gas distribution business, as well as removal costs, net of salvage.In April 2023, Ameren Illinois filed for a reconciliation adjustment to its 2022 electric distribution service revenue requirement with the ICC, requesting recovery of $127 million. The reconciliation adjustment reflects Ameren Illinois’ actual 2022 recoverable costs, year-end rate base, and capital structure, which was composed of 54% common equity. An ICC decision in this proceeding is required by December 2023, and any approved adjustment would be collected from customers in 2024.In January 2023, Ameren Illinois filed an MYRP with the ICC to be used in setting electric distribution service rates for 2024 through 2027. Under the MYRP, the ICC would approve base rates for electric distribution service to be charged to customers for each calendar year of the four-year period. The following table includes the forecasted revenue requirement, the requested ROE, the requested capital structure common equity percentage, and the forecasted average annual rate base for 2024 through 2027, as reflected in Ameren Illinois’ MYRP:
(a)A capital structure of up to and including 50% common equity is deemed prudent and reasonable by law. A higher equity ratio requires specific ICC approval.Under an MYRP, the IETL permits any initial rate increase to be phased in, with at least 50% of the first annual period’s approved rate increase reflected in rates in the first annual period, with the remaining portion deferred as a regulatory asset that earns a return at the applicable WACC and is collected from customers over a period not to exceed two years beginning within one year after the second annual period’s rates are effective. Ameren Illinois’ MYRP filing utilizes this phase-in provision and proposes to defer 50% of the requested 2024 rate increase of $171 million as a regulatory asset to be collected from customers in 2026. An ICC decision in this proceeding is required by December 2023, with new rates effective starting in January 2024.In January 2023, Ameren Illinois filed a request with the ICC seeking approval to increase its annual revenues for natural gas delivery service by $160 million, which included an estimated $77 million of annual revenues that would otherwise be recovered under the QIP and other riders. The request is based on a 10.7% allowed ROE, a capital structure composed of 53.99% common equity, and a rate base of $2.9 billion. In an attempt to reduce regulatory lag, Ameren Illinois used a 2024 future test year in this proceeding. A decision by the ICC in this proceeding is required by late November 2023, with new rates expected to be effective in early December 2023. For further information on the matters discussed above, see Note 2 – Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part I, Item I, of this report, and the Outlook section below.
Our results of operations and financial position are affected by many factors. Economic conditions, energy-efficiency investments by our customers and by us, technological advances, distributed generation, and the actions of key customers can significantly affect the demand for our services. Ameren and Ameren Missouri results are also affected by seasonal fluctuations in winter heating and summer cooling demands, as well as by energy center maintenance outages. Additionally, fluctuations in interest rates and conditions in the capital and credit markets affect our cost of borrowing, our pension and postretirement benefits costs, the cash surrender value of COLI, and the asset value of Ameren Missouri’s nuclear decommissioning trust fund. Almost all of Ameren’s revenues are subject to state or federal regulation. This regulation has a material impact on the rates we charge customers for our services. Our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity are affected by our ability to align our overall spending, both operating and capital, with the frameworks established by our regulators. See Note 2 – Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part I, Item 1, of this report and Note 2 – Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of the Form 10-K for additional information regarding Ameren Missouri’s, Ameren Illinois’, and ATXI’s regulatory mechanisms.We are observing inflationary pressures on the prices of commodities, labor, services, materials, and supplies, as well as increasing interest rates. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois are generally allowed to pass on to customers prudently incurred costs for fuel, purchased power, and natural gas supply. Additionally, for certain non-commodity cost changes, the use of trackers, riders, and formula ratemaking, as applicable, mitigates our exposure.Ameren Missouri principally uses coal and enriched uranium for fuel in its electric operations and purchases natural gas for its customers. Ameren Illinois purchases power and natural gas for its customers. The prices for these commodities can fluctuate significantly because of the global economic and political environment, weather, supply, demand, and many other factors. We have natural gas cost recovery mechanisms for our Illinois and Missouri natural gas distribution businesses, a purchased power cost recovery mechanism for Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution business, and a FAC for Ameren Missouri’s electric business.We employ various risk management strategies to reduce our exposure to commodity risk and other risks inherent in our business. The reliability of Ameren Missouri’s energy centers and our transmission and distribution systems, and the level and timing of operations and maintenance costs and capital investment, are key factors that we seek to manage in order to optimize our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity.
The following table presents a summary of Ameren’s earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Net income attributable to Ameren common shareholders increased $12 million, or 3 cents per diluted share, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period. The increase was due to net income increases of $13 million, $12 million, $7 million, and $2 million at Ameren Transmission, Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, and activity not reported as part of a segment, primarily at Ameren (parent), respectively. These earnings increases were partially offset by a $22 million net income decrease at Ameren Missouri.Earnings per diluted share were favorably affected in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the year-ago period, by:•increased rate base investments at Ameren Transmission and Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution and a higher recognized ROE due to a higher estimated annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, which increased revenues at these segments (7 cents per share);•decreased other operations and maintenance expenses not subject to formula rates, riders, or trackers, including an increase in the cash surrender value of COLI (3 cents per share);•decreased taxes other than income taxes, primarily at Ameren Missouri, largely resulting from employee retention tax credits received under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (2 cents per share);•increased base rate revenues at Ameren Missouri for the inclusion of previously deferred interest charges pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order effective February 28, 2022, partially offset by increased interest charges resulting from lower deferrals related to infrastructure investments associated with the PISA and RESRAM (2 cents per share);•increased other income, net, largely due to increased non-service cost components of net periodic benefit income not subject to formula rates or trackers (2 cents per share);•increased base rate revenues at Ameren Missouri effective February 28, 2022, pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order, partially offset by the amortization of previously deferred depreciation expense under the PISA and RESRAM, financing costs otherwise recoverable under the PISA and RESRAM, a higher base level of expenses, and the net recovery for amounts associated with the reduction in sales volumes resulting from MEEIA programs (1 cent per share); and•increased Ameren Illinois Natural Gas earnings from investments in qualifying infrastructure recovered under the QIP (1 cent per share).Earnings per diluted share were unfavorably affected in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the year-ago period, by:•decreased electric retail sales at Ameren Missouri, primarily resulting from warmer winter temperatures experienced in 2023 (estimated at 10 cents per share);•increased financing costs, primarily at Ameren Missouri and Ameren (parent), due to higher long-term debt balances at Ameren Missouri and higher interest rates on short-term borrowings (4 cents per share); and•increased weighted-average basic common shares outstanding resulting from issuances of common shares as detailed in Note 4 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part I, Item 1, of this report, and Note 5 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of the Form 10-K (2 cents per share).The cents per share variances above are presented based on the weighted-average basic common shares outstanding in the three months ended March 31, 2022, and do not reflect the impact of dilution on earnings per share, unless otherwise noted. The amounts above other than variances related to income taxes have been presented net of income taxes using Ameren’s 2023 blended federal and state statutory tax rate of 26%. For additional details regarding the Ameren Companies’ results of operations, including explanations of Electric and Natural Gas Margins; Other Operations and Maintenance Expenses; Depreciation and Amortization Expenses; Taxes Other Than Income Taxes; Other Income, Net; Interest Charges; and Income Taxes, see the major headings below.Below is Ameren’s table of income statement components by segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Below is Ameren Illinois’ table of income statement components by segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Electric margins are defined as electric revenues less fuel and purchased power costs. Natural gas margins are defined as natural gas revenues less natural gas purchased for resale. We consider electric and natural gas margins useful measures to analyze the change in profitability of our electric and natural gas operations between periods. We have included the analysis below to complement the financial information we provide in accordance with GAAP. However, these margins may not be a presentation defined under GAAP, and they may not be comparable to other companies’ presentations or more useful than the GAAP information we provide elsewhere in this report.
(a)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $(10) million and $(7) million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Electric DistributionAmeren TransmissionOther/Intersegment Eliminations
(b)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $(1) million in the three months ended March 31, 2023.Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Natural GasOther/Intersegment EliminationsThe following tables present the favorable (unfavorable) variations by Ameren segment for electric and natural gas margins for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period:
(a)Includes an increase in transmission margins of $16 million at Ameren Illinois for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period.(b)For Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution and Ameren Transmission, base rates include increases or decreases to operating revenues related to the revenue requirement reconciliation adjustment under formula rates. For Ameren Missouri, base rates exclude an increase for the recovery of lost electric margins resulting from the MEEIA customer energy-efficiency programs and a decrease in base rates for RESRAM. These changes in Ameren Missouri base rates are included in the “Sales volumes and changes in customer usage patterns (excluding the estimated effects of weather and MEEIA)” and “Cost recovery mechanisms - offset in fuel and purchased power” line items, respectively.(c)Represents the estimated variation resulting primarily from changes in cooling and heating degree-days on electric and natural gas demand compared with the year-ago period; this variation is based on temperature readings from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration weather stations at local airports in our service territories.(d)Electric and natural gas revenue changes are offset by corresponding changes in “Fuel,” “Purchased power,” and “Natural gas purchased for resale” on the statement of income, resulting in no change to electric and natural gas margins. Activity in Other/Intersegment Eliminations represents the elimination of related-party transactions between Ameren Missouri, Ameren Illinois, and ATXI, as well as Ameren Transmission revenue from transmission services provided to Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution. See Note 8 – Related-party Transactions and Note 14 – Segment Information under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information on intersegment eliminations.(e)Offsetting expense increases or decreases are reflected in “Other operations and maintenance,” “Depreciation and amortization,” or in “Taxes other than income taxes,” within the “Operating Expenses” section and "Income Taxes" in the statement of income. These items have no overall impact on earnings.
Ameren’s electric margins increased $17 million, or 2%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, due to increased margins at Ameren Transmission and Ameren Missouri, partially offset by decreased margins at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, as discussed below. Ameren’s natural gas margins decreased $4 million, or 1%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, due to decreased margins at Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, as discussed below.
Ameren Transmission’s margins increased $17 million, or 12%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period. Base rate revenues were favorably affected by higher recoverable expenses (+$11 million) and increased capital investment (+$6 million), as evidenced by an 11% increase in rate base used to calculate the revenue requirement.
Ameren Missouri’s electric margins increased $8 million, or 2%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period. Revenues associated with “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in fuel and purchased power” increased $12 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, due to changes in amortization of costs previously deferred under the FAC that were reflected in customer rates. The changes to “Cost recovery mechanisms - offset in fuel and purchased power” are fully offset by “Cost recovery mechanisms - offset in electric revenue,” in the table above, and result in no impact to margins. Ameren Missouri’s 5% exposure to net energy cost variances under the FAC is reflected within “Off-system sales, capacity, and FAC revenues, net” and “Energy costs (excluding the estimated effect of weather),” which was comparable between periods. The change in net energy costs is the sum of “Off-system sales, capacity and FAC revenues, net” (+$90 million) and “Energy costs (excluding the estimated effect of weather)” (-$90 million) in the table above. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, these revenues and costs increased primarily due to higher capacity prices, partially offset by the effect of decreased generation volumes. Ameren Missouri sells nearly all of its capacity to the MISO and purchases the capacity it needs to supply its native load sales from the MISO. Capacity revenues increased $154 million and capacity costs increased $149 million. Capacity revenues and costs increased as the capacity price set by the annual MISO auction in 2022 increased from $5 per MW-day to $237 per MW-day. The April 2021 MISO auction pricing was effective from June 2021 through May 2022, while the April 2022 MISO auction pricing established the annual rate beginning in June 2022. See Outlook for additional information related to the April 2022 MISO auction. These increases in capacity revenues and costs were partially offset by the effect of lower market prices for power, which resulted in a decrease in off-system sales and related fuel costs.Higher electric base rates, excluding the change in base rates for the MEEIA customer energy-efficiency programs and the RESRAM, resulting from the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order effective February 28, 2022, partially offset by higher net energy costs included in base rates, increased margins an estimated $37 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023. The change in electric base rates is the sum of the change in “Base rates (estimate)” (+$38 million) and the “Effect of higher net energy costs included in base rates” (-$1 million) in the table above.The following items had an unfavorable effect on Ameren Missouri’s electric margins between periods:•Winter temperatures were warmer as heating degree days decreased 18% for the three months ended March 31, 2023. The aggregate effect of weather decreased margins an estimated $26 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023. The change in margins due to weather is the sum of the “Effect of weather (estimate)” on electric revenues (-$33 million) and the “Effect of weather (estimate)” on fuel and purchased power (+$7 million) in the table above.•Excluding the estimated effects of weather and the MEEIA customer energy-efficiency programs, electric revenues decreased an estimated $7 million. This was primarily due to a decrease in retail sales volumes and a decrease in the average retail price per kilowatthour related to changes in customer usage patterns.Ameren Missouri’s natural gas margins were comparable between periods. Purchased gas costs increased $9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, due to amortization of natural gas costs previously deferred under the PGA, driven by a significant increase in cost and customer demand as result of the extremely cold weather in mid-February 2021. The increased purchased natural gas costs are fully offset by an increase in natural gas revenues under the PGA, resulting in no impact to margin. The increase in purchased natural gas cost is reflected in “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in natural gas revenue” and the associated recoverability from customers is reflected in “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in natural gas purchased for resale” in the table above.
Ameren Illinois’ electric margins increased $11 million, or 3%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, driven by increased margins at Ameren Illinois Transmission, partially offset by decreased margins at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution. Ameren Illinois Natural Gas’ margins decreased $4 million, or 2%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period.
Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution’s margins decreased $5 million, or 2%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period. Purchased power costs increased $164 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to increased energy prices (+$97 million) largely reflecting the results of IPA procurement events, and increased capacity prices (+$44 million). In the three months ended March 31, 2023, capacity costs increased as the capacity price set by the annual MISO auction in 2022 increased from $5 per MW-day to $237 per MW-day. The April 2021 MISO auction pricing was effective from June 2021 through May 2022, while the April 2022 MISO auction pricing established the annual rate beginning in June 2022. See Outlook for additional information related to the April 2022 MISO auction. In addition to increased energy and capacity prices, higher volumes increased purchased power costs (+$17 million), primarily due to residential and small commercial customer switching from alternative retail electric suppliers to Ameren Illinois’ supplied power. The increased purchased power costs are fully offset by an increase in electric revenues under the cost recovery mechanisms for purchased power, resulting in no impact to margin. The increase in purchased power cost is reflected in “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in electric revenue” and the associated recoverability from customers is reflected in “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in fuel and purchased power” in the table above.The following items had an unfavorable effect on Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution’s margins between periods:•Other cost recovery mechanisms decreased margins by $8 million, primarily due to a lower amount of bad debt costs included in customer rates pursuant to the associated rider.•Base rates decreased margins by $4 million due to lower recoverable non-purchased power expenses (-$13 million), partially offset by a higher recognized ROE (+$6 million), as evidenced by an increase of 115 basis points in the estimated annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds, and increased capital investment (+$3 million), as evidenced by an 8% increase in rate base used to calculate the revenue requirement.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, revenues increased $4 million due to the recovery of and return on increased energy-efficiency program investments under performance-based formula ratemaking.
Ameren Illinois Natural Gas’ margins decreased $4 million, or 2%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period. Purchased gas costs decreased $86 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to lower amortization of natural gas costs that were previously deferred under the PGA and lower natural gas prices in 2023. Those deferred natural gas costs related to the mid-February 2021 weather event were fully recovered from customers by the end of 2022. The decreased purchased natural gas costs are fully offset by a decrease in natural gas revenues under the PGA, resulting in no impact to margin. The decrease in purchased natural gas cost is reflected in “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in natural gas revenue” and the associated recoverability from customers is reflected in “Cost recovery mechanisms – offset in natural gas purchased for resale” in the table above. Other cost recovery mechanisms decreased revenues $7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to decreased revenues for excise taxes. Revenues increased $3 million due to additional investment in natural gas infrastructure under the QIP for the three months ended March 31, 2023.
Ameren Illinois Transmission’s margins increased $16 million, or 16%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period. Base rate revenues were favorably affected by higher recoverable expenses (+$9 million) and increased capital investment (+$7 million), as evidenced by a 17% increase in rate base used to calculate the revenue requirement.
(a)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $5 million and $3 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Natural GasOther/Intersegment EliminationsAmeren Illinois Electric DistributionAmeren Transmission
Other operations and maintenance expenses decreased $13 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, due to changes discussed below.
Other operations and maintenance expenses were comparable between periods.
Other operations and maintenance expenses increased $7 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily due to the following items: •Labor and benefit costs increased $6 million, primarily because of a higher base level of pension service costs reflected in electric service rates effective February 28, 2022, pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC rate order. •Transmission and distribution expenditures increased $5 million, primarily because of timing of system maintenance expenditures.•MEEIA customer energy-efficiency program spend increased $4 million, as approved by the MoPSC.The above increases were partially offset by a $9 million increase in the cash surrender value of COLI. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, the effect of changes in the cash surrender value of COLI was a gain of $3 million, compared with a loss of $6 million in the year-ago period.
Other operations and maintenance expenses decreased $21 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, as discussed below. Other operations and maintenance expenses were comparable at Ameren Illinois Transmission between periods.
Other operations and maintenance expenses decreased $18 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period primarily because of the following items:•Bad debt costs decreased $13 million due to a lower amount of costs included in customer rates pursuant to the associated rider. •Distribution system expenditures decreased $7 million, primarily because of disciplined cost management and timing of vegetation management expenses. •The cash surrender value of COLI increased $4 million, primarily because of favorable market returns in 2023, compared with unfavorable market returns in the year-ago period. The above decreases were partially offset by a $3 million increase in the amortization of regulatory assets associated with customer energy-efficiency program investments under formula ratemaking.
Other operations and maintenance expenses decreased $4 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily because of a $2 million increase in the cash surrender value of COLI. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, the effect of changes in the cash surrender value of COLI was a gain of $1 million, compared with a loss of $1 million in the year-ago period.
(a)Includes other/intersegment eliminations of $1 million and $1 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.    Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Natural GasOther/Intersegment EliminationsAmeren Illinois Electric DistributionAmeren TransmissionDepreciation and amortization expenses increased $21 million, $12 million, and $9 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, at Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois, respectively, primarily because of additional property, plant, and equipment investments across their respective segments. Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s depreciation and amortization expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, were affected by the following, which include the effect of the additional investments at Ameren Missouri:•Depreciation and amortization rate changes effective February 28, 2022, pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order, which increased depreciation and amortization expenses by $11 million.•Increased depreciation and amortization expenses of $11 million for amounts previously deferred under the PISA and RESRAM and subsequently reflected in base rates effective February 28, 2022, pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order, largely due to investments in wind generation.•The absence in 2023 of 2022 deferrals and increased amortization of Meramec Energy Center retirement costs increased depreciation and amortization expenses by $8 million pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order, which established a five-year recovery period for certain Meramec Energy Center costs beginning February 28, 2022.•Depreciation and amortization at Ameren and Ameren Missouri reflected a deferral to a regulatory asset of depreciation and amortization pursuant to PISA and RESRAM. The amount of depreciation and amortization included in base rates for PISA and RESRAM deferrals was updated when new customer rates became effective on February 28, 2022, pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order, which incorporated deferrals through September 30, 2021. Lower deferrals, due to the inclusion in base rates of depreciation and amortization associated with certain property, plant, and equipment previously deferred under the PISA and RESRAM, increased depreciation and amortization expenses by $8 million.•The retirement of the Meramec Energy Center in December 2022, which decreased depreciation and amortization expenses by $14 million.•The net under-recovery of RESRAM eligible expenses decreased depreciation and amortization expenses by $13 million.
(a)Includes $2 million and $2 million at Ameren Transmission in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and other/intersegment eliminations of $4 million and $4 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Natural GasOther/Intersegment EliminationsAmeren Illinois Electric DistributionAmeren TransmissionTaxes other than income taxes decreased $15 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily because of a $7 million decrease in excise taxes at Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, primarily resulting from decreased sales. Taxes other than income taxes also decreased $5 million at Ameren Missouri because of employee retention tax credits received under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act.
Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Natural GasOther/Intersegment EliminationsAmeren Illinois Electric DistributionAmeren TransmissionOther income, net, increased $18 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily because of increases in the non-service cost component of net periodic benefit income of $8 million, $7 million, and $3 million for activity not reported as part of a segment, Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution, and Ameren Illinois Natural Gas, respectively. Other income, net, also increased because of a $2 million increase in the equity portion of allowance for funds used during construction for Ameren Transmission. These increases in other income, net, were partially offset by a $5 million decrease in interest income on industrial development revenue bonds at Ameren Missouri, as these bonds were settled in December 2022 and January 2023. See Note 5 – Other Income, Net, under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information. See Note 11 – Retirement Benefits under Part I, Item 1, of this report for more information on the non-service cost components of net periodic benefit income.
Ameren MissouriAmeren Illinois Natural GasOther/Intersegment EliminationsAmeren Illinois Electric DistributionAmeren TransmissionInterest charges increased $23 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily because of the following items: •Interest charges at Ameren and Ameren Missouri reflected a deferral to a regulatory asset of interest charges pursuant to PISA and RESRAM. The amount of interest charges included in base rates for PISA and RESRAM deferrals was updated when new customer rates became effective on February 28, 2022, pursuant to the December 2021 MoPSC electric rate order, which incorporated deferrals through September 30, 2021. Lower deferrals, due to the inclusion in base rates of interest associated with certain property, plant, and equipment previously deferred under the PISA and RESRAM, increased interest charges by $9 million.•Issuances of long-term debt at Ameren Missouri in April 2022 and March 2023 collectively increased interest charges by $6 million.•Interest charges increased $6 million and $5 million at Ameren (parent) and Ameren Missouri, respectively, because of higher interest rates on increased levels of short-term borrowings. •Issuances of long-term debt at Ameren Illinois Electric Distribution in August and November 2022 collectively increased interest charges by $4 million. The following items partially offset the above increases in interest charges: •Interest charges decreased $5 million at Ameren Missouri because of an increase in the allowance for borrowed funds, primarily due to increased eligible construction work in process balances and a higher applicable borrowing rate. •Interest charges decreased $5 million at Ameren Missouri, primarily due to the termination of a financing obligation agreement related to the CT energy center in Audrain County.See Note 3 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part I, Item 1, of this report and the Long-term Debt and Equity section below for additional information on short-term borrowings and long-term debt, respectively. See Note 4 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information on the termination of the financing obligation agreement.
The following table presents effective income tax rates for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
(a)Estimate of the annual effective income tax rate adjusted to reflect the tax effect of items discrete to the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.See Note 12 – Income Taxes under Part I, Item 1, of this report for a reconciliation of the federal statutory corporate income tax rate to the effective income tax rate for the Ameren Companies.
Collections from our tariff-based revenues are our principal source of cash provided by operating activities. A diversified retail customer mix, primarily consisting of rate-regulated residential, commercial, and industrial customers, provides us with a reasonably predictable source of cash. In addition to using cash provided by operating activities, we use available cash, drawings under committed credit agreements, commercial paper issuances, and/or, in the case of Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, short-term affiliate borrowings to support normal operations and temporary capital requirements. We may reduce our short-term borrowings with cash provided by operations or, at our discretion, with long-term borrowings, or, in the case of Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, with capital contributions from Ameren (parent). As of March 31, 2023, there have been no material changes other than in the ordinary course of business related to cash requirements arising from these long-term commitments provided in Item 7 of the Form 10-K.We expect to make significant capital expenditures over the next five years, supported by a combination of long-term debt and equity, as we invest in our electric and natural gas utility infrastructure to support overall system reliability, grid modernization, renewable energy target requirements, environmental compliance, and other improvements. For additional information about our long-term debt outstanding, including maturities due within one year, and the applicable interest rates, see Note 5 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8 of the Form 10-K and Note 4 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part I, Item 1, of this report. As part of its funding plan for capital expenditures, Ameren is using newly issued shares of common stock, rather than market-purchased shares, to satisfy requirements under the DRPlus and employee benefit plans and expects to continue to do so through at least 2027. Ameren expects these equity issuances to total about $100 million annually. In addition, Ameren has an ATM program under which Ameren may offer and sell from time to time common stock, which includes the ability to enter into forward sales agreements, subject to market conditions and other factors. There were no shares issued under the ATM program for the three months ended March 31, 2023. As of April 30, 2023, Ameren has entered into multiple forward sale agreements under the ATM program with various counterparties relating to 3.8 million shares of common stock. Ameren expects to settle approximately $300 million of the forward sale agreements with physical delivery of 3.2 million shares of common stock by December 31, 2023. Also, Ameren plans to issue approximately $500 million of equity each year from 2024 to 2027, in addition to issuances under the DRPlus and employee benefit plans. As of March 31, 2023, Ameren had approximately $980 million of common stock available for sale under the ATM program, which takes into account the forward sale agreements in effect as of March 31, 2023. Ameren expects its equity to total capitalization to be about 45% through December 31, 2027, with the long-term intent to support solid investment-grade credit ratings. See Long-term Debt and Equity below and Note 4 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information on the ATM program, including the forward sale agreements under the ATM program relating to common stock.The use of cash provided by operating activities and short-term borrowings to fund capital expenditures and other long-term investments at the Ameren Companies frequently results in a working capital deficit, defined as current liabilities exceeding current assets, as was the case at March 31, 2023, for Ameren and Ameren Illinois. With the credit capacity available under the Credit Agreements, and cash and cash equivalents, Ameren (parent), Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois, collectively, had net available liquidity of $1.4 billion at March 31, 2023. Additionally, as of March 31, 2023, Ameren could have settled the forward sale agreements with physical delivery of 3.4 million shares of common stock to the respective counterparties in exchange for cash of $317 million. See Credit Facility Borrowings and Liquidity and Long-term Debt and Equity below for additional information.The following table presents net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
(a)Both Ameren and Ameren Illinois’ cash provided by operating activities included cash outflows of $25 million and $16 million for the FEJA electric energy-efficiency rider and $2 million and $3 million for the customer generation rebate program for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Our cash provided by operating activities is affected by fluctuations of trade accounts receivable, inventories, and accounts and wages payable, among other things, as well as the unique regulatory environment for each of our businesses. Substantially all expenditures related to fuel, purchased power, and natural gas purchased for resale are recovered from customers through rate adjustment mechanisms, which may be adjusted without a traditional regulatory rate review, subject to prudence reviews. Similar regulatory mechanisms exist for certain other operating expenses that can also affect the timing of cash provided by operating activities. The timing of cash payments for costs recoverable under our regulatory mechanisms differs from the recovery period of those costs. Additionally, the seasonality of our electric and natural gas businesses, primarily caused by seasonal customer rates and changes in customer demand due to weather, significantly affects the amount and timing of our cash provided by operating activities.As a result of the significant increase in customer demand and prices for natural gas and electricity experienced in mid-February 2021 due to extremely cold weather, Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois had under-recovered costs for the month of February 2021 under their PGA clauses and, for Ameren Missouri, under the FAC (Ameren Missouri – PGA $53 million, FAC $50 million; Ameren Illinois – PGA $221 million). Ameren Missouri’s PGA under-recovery is being collected from customers over 36 months beginning November 2021, pursuant to an October 2021 MoPSC order, and the FAC under-recovery was collected over eight months beginning October 2021. Ameren Illinois collected the PGA under-recovery over 18 months beginning April 2021.
Ameren’s cash provided by operating activities increased $108 million in the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period. The following items contributed to the increase:•A $143 million decrease in net collateral posted with counterparties, primarily due to changes in the market prices of power, natural gas, and other fuels.•A $10 million decrease in the cost of natural gas held in storage, primarily at Ameren Illinois, because of lower prices.•An $8 million increase resulting from increased customer collections, primarily from base rate increases effective February 28, 2022 pursuant to Ameren Missouri’s December 2021 electric rate order, partially offset by a decrease under Ameren Illinois’ PGA resulting from the recovery in 2022 of costs for the mid-February 2021 weather event discussed above and a decrease attributable to other regulatory mechanisms.The following items partially offset the increase in Ameren’s cash from operating activities between periods:•A $33 million increase in coal inventory levels at Ameren Missouri, primarily due to fewer transportation delays and less coal burned in 2023 as a result of lower off-system sales driven by lower market power prices and decreased retail load because of warmer winter temperatures.•An $11 million increase in purchases of materials and supplies inventories to support operations as levels were increased to mitigate against potential supply disruptions.•An $11 million increase in interest payments, primarily due to an increase in the average outstanding debt and an increase in interest rates.•A $9 million increase in property tax payments at Ameren Missouri, primarily due to higher assessed property tax values.
Ameren Missouri’s cash provided by operating activities increased $97 million in the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period. The following items contributed to the increase:•A $112 million decrease in net collateral posted with counterparties, primarily due to changes in the market prices of power, natural gas, and other fuels.•A $35 million increase resulting from increased customer collections primarily from base rate increases effective February 28, 2022 pursuant to the December 2021 electric rate order, partially offset by a decrease attributable to other regulatory mechanisms.The following items partially offset the increase in Ameren Missouri’s cash from operating activities between periods:•A $33 million increase in coal inventory levels, primarily due to fewer transportation delays and less coal burned in 2023 as a result of lower off-system sales driven by lower market power prices and decreased retail load because of warmer winter temperatures.•A $12 million increase in purchases of materials and supplies inventories to support operations as levels were increased to mitigate against potential supply disruptions.•A $9 million increase in property tax payments, primarily due to higher assessed property tax values.
Ameren Illinois’ cash provided by operating activities increased $31 million in the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period. The following items contributed to the increase:•A $31 million decrease in net collateral posted with counterparties, primarily due to changes in the market prices of power and natural gas.•A $10 million decrease in the cost of natural gas held in storage because of lower prices.The increase in Ameren Illinois’ cash from operating activities between periods was partially offset by a $22 million decrease in customer collections, primarily because of a decrease under the PGA resulting from the recovery in 2022 of costs for the mid-February 2021 weather event discussed above, partially offset by a net increase attributable to other regulatory recovery mechanisms.
Ameren’s cash used in investing activities increased $184 million during the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily as a result of a $157 million increase in capital expenditures, largely resulting from increased expenditures for electric transmission and distribution infrastructure upgrades at Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois. In addition, in 2022, Ameren Missouri received $17 million in insurance proceeds for the Callaway Energy Center’s generator.Ameren Missouri’s cash used in investing activities increased $96 million during the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period, primarily as a result of a $67 million increase in capital expenditures, largely resulting from increased expenditures for electric transmission and distribution infrastructure upgrades. In addition, in 2022, Ameren Missouri received $17 million in insurance proceeds for the Callaway Energy Center’s generator.Ameren Illinois’ cash used in investing activities increased $65 million during the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period, as a result of a $65 million increase in capital expenditures, largely resulting from increased expenditures for electric transmission and distribution infrastructure upgrades.
Cash provided by, or used in, financing activities is a result of our financing needs, which depend on the level of cash provided by operating activities, the level of cash used in investing activities, the level of dividends, and our long-term debt maturities, among other things. Ameren’s cash provided by consolidated financing activities increased $98 million during the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period. During the first three months of 2023, Ameren utilized proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $499 million for capital expenditures and to repay then-outstanding short-term debt. In addition, during the first three months of 2023, Ameren utilized proceeds from net commercial paper issuances of $179 million along with cash provided by operating activities to fund, in part, capital expenditures. In comparison, during the first three months of 2022, Ameren utilized proceeds from net commercial paper issuances of $555 million along with cash provided by operating activities to fund, in part, capital expenditures. During the first three months of 2023, Ameren paid common stock dividends of $165 million, compared with $152 million in the year-ago period, as a result of an increase in both the dividend rate and the number of common shares outstanding.Ameren Missouri’s cash provided by financing activities was comparable between periods. During the first three months of 2023, Ameren Missouri utilized proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt of $499 million for capital expenditures and to repay then-outstanding short-term debt. During the first three months of 2023, Ameren Missouri repaid net commercial paper borrowings totaling $132 million. In comparison, during the first three months of 2022, Ameren Missouri utilized net proceeds from net commercial paper issuances of $363 million and cash provided by operating activities to fund, in part, capital expenditures. Ameren Illinois’ cash provided by financing activities increased $56 million during the first three months of 2023, compared with the year-ago period. During the first three months of 2023, Ameren Illinois utilized proceeds from net commercial paper issuances of $60 million and cash provided by operating activities to fund, in part, capital expenditures, compared to $4 million in such proceeds in the year-ago period.See Long-term Debt and Equity in this section for additional information on issuances of long-term debt, issuances of common stock, and noncash settlement of a financing obligation.
The following table presents Ameren’s consolidated liquidity as of March 31, 2023:
(a)Does not include Ameren’s forward equity sale agreements. See Note 4 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information.The Credit Agreements, among other things, provide $2.6 billion of credit until maturity in December 2027. See Note 3 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information on the Credit Agreements. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, Ameren (parent), Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois each issued commercial paper. Borrowings under the Credit Agreements and commercial paper issuances are based upon available interest rates at the time of the borrowing or issuance.Ameren has a money pool agreement with and among its utility subsidiaries to coordinate and to provide for certain short-term cash and working capital requirements. As short-term capital needs arise, and based on availability of funding sources, Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois will access funds from the utility money pool, the Credit Agreements, or the commercial paper programs depending on which option has the lowest interest rates.See Note 3 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information on credit agreements, commercial paper issuances, Ameren’s money pool arrangements and related borrowings, and relevant interest rates.The issuance of short-term debt securities by Ameren’s utility subsidiaries is subject to FERC approval under the Federal Power Act. In January 2023, the FERC issued orders authorizing Ameren Missouri, Ameren Illinois, and ATXI to issue up to $1 billion, $1 billion, and $300 million, respectively, of short-term debt securities through January 2025.The Ameren Companies continually evaluate the adequacy and appropriateness of their liquidity arrangements for changing business conditions. When business conditions warrant, changes may be made to existing credit agreements or to other borrowing arrangements, or other arrangements may be made.
The following table presents issuances (net of any issuance premiums or discounts) of long-term debt and equity, as well as maturities of long-term debt for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
(a)Ameren issued a total of 0.1 million and 0.1 million shares of common stock under its DRPlus and 401(k) plan in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(b)Excludes a $7 million and $8 million receivable at March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(c)Excludes 0.5 million and 0.4 million shares of common stock valued at $37 million and $31 million issued for no cash consideration in connection with stock-based compensation for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(d)In January 2023, Ameren Missouri and Audrain County mutually agreed to terminate a financing obligation agreement related to the CT energy center in Audrain County, which was scheduled to expire in December 2023. No cash was exchanged in connection with the termination of the agreement as the $240 million principal amount of the financing obligation due from Ameren Missouri was equal to the amount of bond service payments due to Ameren Missouri.See Note 4 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part I, Item 1, of this report for additional information, including proceeds from issuances of long-term debt, including Ameren Missouri’s March 2023 issuance of first mortgage bonds, the use of those proceeds, Ameren’s forward equity sale agreements, and the ATM program.
At March 31, 2023, the Ameren Companies were in compliance with the provisions and covenants contained in their credit agreements, indentures, and articles of incorporation, as applicable, and ATXI was in compliance with the provisions and covenants contained in its note purchase agreements. See Note 3 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part I, Item 1, of this report and Note 4 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity and Note 5 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of the Form 10-K for a discussion of provisions, applicable cross-default provisions, and covenants contained in our credit agreements, in ATXI’s note purchase agreements, and in certain of the Ameren Companies’ indentures and articles of incorporation.We consider access to short-term and long-term capital and credit markets to be a significant source of funding for capital requirements not satisfied by cash provided by our operating activities. Inability to raise capital on reasonable terms, particularly during times of uncertainty in the capital and credit markets, could negatively affect our ability to maintain and expand our businesses. After assessing their respective current operating performance, liquidity, and credit ratings (see Credit Ratings below), Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois each believes that it will continue to have access to the capital and credit markets on reasonable terms. However, events beyond Ameren’s, Ameren Missouri’s, and Ameren Illinois’ control may create uncertainty in the capital and credit markets or make access to the capital and credit markets uncertain or limited. Such events could increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital and credit markets.
The amount and timing of dividends payable on Ameren’s common stock are within the sole discretion of Ameren’s board of directors. Ameren’s board of directors has not set specific targets or payout parameters when declaring common stock dividends, but it considers various factors, including Ameren’s overall payout ratio, payout ratios of our peers, projected cash flow and potential future cash flow requirements, historical earnings and cash flow, projected earnings, impacts of regulatory orders or legislation, and other key business considerations. Ameren expects its dividend payout ratio to be between 55% and 70% of annual earnings over the next few years.See Note 4 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity and Note 5 – Long-term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, of the Form 10-K for additional discussion of covenants and provisions contained in certain of the Ameren Companies’ financial agreements and articles of incorporation that would restrict the Ameren Companies’ payment of dividends in certain circumstances. At March 31, 2023, none of these circumstances existed at Ameren, Ameren Missouri, or Ameren Illinois and, as a result, these companies were not restricted from paying dividends.The following table presents common stock dividends declared and paid by Ameren Corporation to its common shareholders and by Ameren subsidiaries to their parent, Ameren Corporation, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Our credit ratings affect our liquidity, our access to the capital and credit markets, our cost of borrowing under our credit facilities and our commercial paper programs, and our collateral posting requirements under commodity contracts.The following table presents the principal credit ratings by Moody’s and S&P, as applicable, effective on the date of this report:
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities. It should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Ratings are subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization.
Any weakening of our credit ratings may reduce access to capital and trigger additional collateral postings and prepayments. Such changes may also increase the cost of borrowing, resulting in an adverse effect on earnings. Cash collateral postings and prepayments made with external parties, including postings related to exchange-traded contracts, and cash collateral posted by external parties were immaterial at March 31, 2023. A sub-investment-grade issuer or senior unsecured debt rating (below “Baa3” from Moody’s or below “BBB-” from S&P) at March 31, 2023, could have resulted in Ameren, Ameren Missouri, or Ameren Illinois being required to post additional collateral or other assurances for certain trade obligations amounting to $122 million, $59 million, and $63 million, respectively.Changes in commodity prices could trigger additional collateral postings and prepayments. Based on credit ratings at March 31, 2023, if market prices were 15% higher or lower than March 31, 2023 levels in the next 12 months and 20% higher or lower thereafter through the end of the term of the commodity contracts, then Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois could be required to post an immaterial amount, compared to each company’s liquidity, of collateral or provide other assurances for certain trade obligations.
Below are some key trends, events, and uncertainties that may reasonably affect our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity, as well as our ability to achieve strategic and financial objectives, for 2023 and beyond. For additional information regarding recent rate orders, lawsuits, and pending requests filed with state and federal regulatory commissions, including those discussed below, see Note 2 – Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part I, Item 1, of this report and Note 2 – Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part II, Item 8, of the Form 10-K.Operations•We are observing inflationary pressures on the prices of commodities, labor, services, materials, and supplies, as well as increasing interest rates. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois are generally allowed to pass on to customers prudently incurred costs for fuel, purchased power, and natural gas supply. Additionally, for certain non-commodity cost changes, the use of trackers, riders, and formula ratemaking, as applicable, mitigates our exposure. The inflationary pressures and increasing interest rates could impact our ability to control costs and/or make substantial investments in our businesses, including our ability to recover costs and investments, and to earn our allowed ROEs within frameworks established by our regulators, while maintaining rates that are affordable to our customers. In addition, these inflationary pressures and increasing interest rates could adversely affect our customers’ usage of, or payment for, our services. In April 2022, the MISO released the results of its 2022 capacity auction, which projected a capacity shortage in the central region of the MISO footprint, which includes Ameren Missouri’s and Ameren Illinois’ service territories. The annual auction resulted in a capacity price increase from $5 per MW-day for June 2021 through May 2022 to $237 per MW-day for June 2022 through May 2023. Ameren Illinois’ purchased power costs increased by nearly $500 million for calendar year 2022, compared to 2021, largely due to higher energy and capacity prices. Higher purchased power costs for calendar year 2023, compared to 2021, are also likely but Ameren Illinois cannot reasonably estimate the amount of the increase as capacity pricing for June 2023 through December 2023 will be determined once the results of the 2023 MISO capacity auction are announced in mid-May 2023. Because of the power procurement riders, the difference between actual purchased power costs and costs billed to customers in a given period is deferred as a regulatory asset or liability. These pass-through costs do not affect Ameren Illinois’ net income, as any change in costs are offset by a corresponding change in revenues. Also, largely due to the capacity price set by the April 2022 MISO auction, Ameren Missouri’s capacity revenues and purchased power costs increased by approximately $370 million and $360 million, respectively, for the calendar year 2022, compared to 2021. Ameren Missouri sells nearly all of its capacity to the MISO and purchases the capacity it needs to supply its native load sales from the MISO. Higher capacity revenues and purchased power costs for calendar year 2023, compared to 2021, are also likely but Ameren Missouri cannot reasonably estimate the amount of the increases as capacity pricing for June 2023 through December 2023 will be determined once the results of the 2023 MISO capacity auction are announced in mid-May 2023. Capacity revenues and purchased power costs are a part of the net energy costs recoverable under the FAC, with 95% of the variance between net energy costs and the amount set in base rates recovered or refunded through the FAC.•The PISA permits Ameren Missouri to defer and recover 85% of the depreciation expense for investments in qualifying property, plant, and equipment placed in service and not included in base rates. Investments not eligible for recovery under the PISA include amounts related to new nuclear and natural gas generating units and service to new customer premises. Additionally, the PISA permits Ameren Missouri to earn a return at the applicable WACC on rate base that incorporates those qualifying investments, as well as changes in total accumulated depreciation excluding retirements and plant-related deferred income taxes since the previous regulatory rate review. The regulatory asset for accumulated PISA deferrals also earns a return at the applicable WACC until added to rate base prospectively. Ameren Missouri recognizes an offset to interest charges for its cost of debt relating to each return allowed under the PISA, with the difference between the applicable WACC and its cost of debt recognized in revenues when recovery of PISA deferrals is reflected in customer rates. Approved PISA deferrals are recovered over a period of 20 years following a regulatory rate review. Additionally, under the RESRAM, Ameren Missouri is permitted to recover the 15% of depreciation expense not recovered under the PISA, and earn a return at the applicable WACC for investments in renewable generation plant placed in service to comply with Missouri’s renewable energy standard. Accumulated RESRAM deferrals earn carrying costs at short-term interest rates. The PISA and the RESRAM mitigate the effects of regulatory lag between regulatory rate reviews. Those investments not eligible for recovery under the PISA and the remaining 15% of certain property, plant, and equipment placed in service, unless eligible for recovery under the RESRAM, remain subject to regulatory lag. As a result of the PISA election, additional provisions of the law apply to Ameren Missouri, including limitations on electric customer rate increases. The current rate limitation, which is effective through 2023, is a 2.85% cap on the compound annual growth rate in the average overall customer rate per kilowatthour, based on the electric rates that became effective in April 2017, less half of the annual savings from the TCJA that was passed on to customers as approved in a July 2018 MoPSC order. The rate increase proposed in the April 2023 nonunanimous stipulation and agreement filed in Ameren Missouri's 2022 electric service regulatory rate review does not exceed this rate increase limitation. Missouri Senate Bill 745 became effective on August 28, 2022. The law extended Ameren Missouri’s PISA election through December 2028 and allows for an additional extension through December 2033 if requested by Ameren Missouri and approved by the MoPSC, among other things. The law established a 2.5% annual limit on increases to the electric service revenue requirement used to set customer rates due to the inclusion of incremental PISA deferrals in the revenue requirement. The limitation will be effective for revenue requirements approved by the MoPSC after January 1, 2024, and will be based on the revenue requirement established in the immediately preceding rate order.•In 2018, the MoPSC issued an order approving Ameren Missouri’s MEEIA 2019 plan. The plan includes a portfolio of customer energy-efficiency and demand response programs through December 2023. Ameren Missouri intends to invest approximately $350 million over the life of the plan, including $75 million in 2023. The plan includes the continued use of the MEEIA rider, which allows Ameren Missouri to collect from, or refund to, customers any difference in actual MEEIA program costs and related lost electric margins and the amounts collected from customers. In addition, the plan includes a performance incentive that provides Ameren Missouri an opportunity to earn additional revenues by achieving certain customer energy-efficiency goals. If the target spending goals are achieved for 2023, the performance incentive would result in revenues of $12 million in 2023.•In March 2023, Ameren Missouri filed a proposed customer energy-efficiency plan with the MoPSC under the MEEIA. This filing proposed a three-year plan, which includes a portfolio of customer energy-efficiency programs, along with the continued use of the MEEIA rider discussed above. If the plan is approved, Ameren Missouri intends to invest $122 million annually in the proposed customer energy-efficiency programs from 2024 to 2026. In addition, Ameren Missouri requested performance incentives applicable to each plan year to earn additional revenues by achieving certain customer energy-efficiency and target spending goals. If 100% of the goals are achieved, Ameren Missouri would earn additional revenues totaling $55 million over the three-year plan. Ameren Missouri also requested additional performance incentives applicable to each plan year totaling up to $14 million over the three-year plan, if Ameren Missouri exceeds 100% of the goals. The MoPSC is under no deadline to issue an order in this proceeding.•In August 2022, Ameren Missouri filed a request with the MoPSC seeking approval to increase its annual revenues for electric service by $316 million. In April 2023, Ameren Missouri, the MoPSC staff, the MoOPC, and certain intervenors filed a nonunanimous stipulation and agreement with the MoPSC to increase Ameren Missouri’s annual revenues for electric service by $140 million. The remaining intervenors did not object to the agreement. A decision by the MoPSC on the nonunanimous stipulation and agreement is expected by June 2023, with new rates expected to take effect on July 1, 2023. Ameren Missouri cannot predict whether the MoPSC will approve the stipulation and agreement, or, if approved, whether any application for rehearing or appeal will be filed, or the outcome if so filed. In addition, if the MoPSC does not approve the stipulation and agreement, Ameren Missouri cannot predict the level of any electric service rate change the MoPSC may approve, whether the requested regulatory recovery mechanisms will be approved, or whether any rate change that may eventually be approved will be sufficient for Ameren Missouri to recover its costs and earn a reasonable return on its investments when the rate change goes into effect.•Ameren Illinois and ATXI use a forward-looking rate calculation with an annual revenue requirement reconciliation for each company’s electric transmission business. Based on expected rate base and the currently allowed 10.52% ROE, which includes a 50 basis point incentive adder for participation in an RTO, the revenue requirements included in 2023 rates for Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s electric transmission businesses are $476 million and $194 million, respectively. These revenue requirements represent an increase in Ameren Illinois’ revenue requirement of $54 million and a decrease in ATXI’s revenue requirement of $1 million from the revenue requirements reflected in 2022 rates, primarily due to higher expected rate base at Ameren Illinois and a lower expected rate base at ATXI. These rates will affect Ameren Illinois’ and ATXI’s cash receipts during 2023, but will not determine their respective electric transmission service operating revenues, which will instead be based on 2023 actual recoverable costs, rate base, and a return on rate base at the applicable WACC as calculated under the FERC formula ratemaking framework.•The allowed base ROE for FERC-regulated transmission rates previously charged under the MISO tariff is the subject of pending proceedings. Depending on the outcome of the proceedings, the transmission rates charged during previous periods and the currently effective rates may be subject to change and refund. In March 2020, the FERC issued a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on its transmission incentives policy, which increased the incentive ROE for participation in an RTO to 100 basis points from the current 50 basis points and revised the parameters for awarding incentives, while limiting the overall incentives to a cap of 250 basis points, among other things. In April 2021, the FERC issued a Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, which proposes to modify the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking’s incentive for participation in an RTO by limiting this incentive for utilities that join an RTO to 50 basis points and only allowing them to earn the incentive for three years, among other things. If this proposal is included in a final rule, Ameren Illinois and ATXI would no longer be eligible for the 50 basis point RTO incentive adder, prospectively. The FERC is under no deadline to issue a final rule on this matter. Ameren is unable to predict the ultimate impact of any changes to the FERC’s incentives policy, or any further order on base ROE. A 50 basis point change in the FERC-allowed ROE would affect Ameren’s and Ameren Illinois’ annual net income by an estimated $14 million and $10 million, respectively, based on each company’s 2023 projected rate base.•Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution service performance-based formula ratemaking framework under the IEIMA allows Ameren Illinois to reconcile electric distribution service rates to its actual revenue requirement on an annual basis to reflect actual recoverable costs incurred and a return at the applicable WACC on year-end rate base through 2023. If a given year’s revenue requirement varies from the amount collected from customers, an adjustment is made to electric operating revenues with an offset to a regulatory asset or liability to reflect that year’s actual revenue requirement, independent of actual sales volumes. The regulatory balance is then collected from, or refunded to, customers within two years from the end of the year. Pursuant to December 2022 and March 2021 ICC orders, Ameren Illinois used the current IEIMA formula framework to establish annual customer rates effective through 2023, and expects to reconcile the related revenue requirement for customer rates established for 2023. As such, Ameren Illinois’ 2023 revenues will reflect, actual recoverable costs, year-end rate base, and a return at the applicable WACC, with the ROE component based on the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds plus 580 basis points. By law, the decoupling provisions extend beyond the end of existing performance-based formula ratemaking, which ensures that Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution revenues authorized in a regulatory rate review are not affected by changes in sales volumes. In April 2023, Ameren Illinois filed for a reconciliation adjustment to its 2022 electric distribution service revenue requirement with the ICC, requesting recovery of $127 million. An ICC decision in this proceeding is required by December 2023, and any approved adjustment would be collected from customers in 2024.•Pursuant to the IETL, which was enacted in September 2021, Ameren Illinois may file an MYRP with the ICC to establish base rates for electric distribution service to be charged to customers for each calendar year of a four-year period. The base rates for a particular calendar year are based on forecasted recoverable costs and an ICC-determined ROE applied to Ameren Illinois’ forecasted average annual rate base using a forecasted capital structure, with a common equity ratio of up to 50% being deemed prudent and reasonable by law and a higher equity ratio requiring specific ICC approval. The ROE determined by the ICC for each calendar year of the four-year period is subject to annual adjustments based on certain performance incentives and penalties. An MYRP allows Ameren Illinois to reconcile electric distribution service rates to its actual revenue requirement on an annual basis, subject to a reconciliation cap and adjustments to the ROE. If a given year’s revenue amount collected from customers varies from the approved revenue requirement, an adjustment would be made to electric operating revenues with an offset to a regulatory asset or liability to reflect that year’s actual revenue requirement, independent of actual sales volumes. The regulatory balance would then be collected from, or refunded to, customers within two years from the end of the applicable annual period. Ameren Illinois’ existing riders will remain effective under the January 2023 MYRP discussed below, and will continue to remain effective beyond 2027 whether it elects to file an MYRP or a traditional regulatory rate review. Additionally, electric distribution service revenues continue to be decoupled from sales volumes under either election.•In January 2023, Ameren Illinois filed an MYRP with the ICC requesting approval of forecasted revenue requirements for electric distribution service for 2024, 2025, 2026, and 2027 of $1,282 million, $1,373 million, $1,477 million, and $1,556 million, respectively. Pursuant to a provision under the IETL that permits initial rate increases under an MYRP to be phased in, Ameren Illinois’ filing proposes to defer 50% of the requested 2024 rate increase of $171 million as a regulatory asset to be collected from customers in 2026. That regulatory asset would earn a return at the applicable WACC. An ICC decision in this proceeding is required by December 2023, with new rates effective starting in January 2024. Ameren Illinois cannot predict the level of any electric distribution service rate change the ICC may approve, or whether any rate change that may eventually be approved will be sufficient for Ameren Illinois to recover its costs to the extent those costs are subject to and exceed the MYRP reconciliation cap and earn a reasonable return on its investments when the rate change goes into effect.•In December 2022, the ICC issued an order in Ameren Illinois’ annual update filing that approved a $61 million increase in Ameren Illinois’ electric distribution service rates beginning in January 2023. Ameren Illinois’ 2023 electric distribution service revenues will be based on its 2023 actual recoverable costs, 2023 year-end rate base, and a return at the applicable WACC, with the ROE component based on the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds plus 580 basis points. As of March 31, 2023, Ameren Illinois expects its 2023 electric distribution year-end rate base to be $4.2 billion. The 2023 revenue requirement reconciliation adjustment will be collected from, or refunded to, customers in 2025. A 50 basis point change in the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds would result in an estimated $12 million change in Ameren’s and Ameren Illinois’ annual net income, based on Ameren Illinois’ 2023 projected year-end rate base, including electric energy-efficiency investments. Ameren Illinois’ recognized ROE for first three months of 2023 was based on an annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds of 3.81%.•In January 2023, Ameren Illinois filed a request with the ICC seeking approval to increase its annual revenues for natural gas delivery service by $160 million, which included an estimated $77 million of annual revenues that would otherwise be recovered under the QIP and other riders. A decision by the ICC in this proceeding is required by late November 2023, with new rates expected to be effective in early December 2023. Ameren Illinois cannot predict the level of any delivery service rate change the ICC may approve, nor whether any rate change that may eventually be approved will be sufficient to enable Ameren Illinois to recover its costs and to earn a reasonable return on investments when the rate changes go into effect. Without legislative action, the QIP will expire after December 2023.•Pursuant to Illinois law, Ameren Illinois’ electric energy-efficiency investments are deferred as a regulatory asset and earn a return at the applicable WACC, with the ROE component based on the annual average of the monthly yields of the 30-year United States Treasury bonds plus 580 basis points. The allowed ROE on electric energy-efficiency investments can be increased or decreased by up to 200 basis points, depending on the achievement of annual energy savings goals. While the ICC has approved a plan for Ameren Illinois to invest approximately $120 million per year in electric energy-efficiency programs through 2025, the ICC has the ability to reduce the amount of electric energy-efficiency savings goals in future program years if there are insufficient cost-effective programs available, which could reduce the investments in electric energy-efficiency programs. The electric energy-efficiency program investments and the return on those investments are collected from customers through a rider and are not recovered through the electric distribution service performance-based formula ratemaking framework.•Ameren Missouri’s next refueling and maintenance outage at its Callaway Energy Center is scheduled for the fall of 2023. During a scheduled refueling, which occurs every 18 months, maintenance expenses are deferred as a regulatory asset and amortized until the completion of the next refueling and maintenance outage. During an outage, depending on the availability of its other generation sources and the market prices for power, Ameren Missouri’s purchased power costs may increase and the amount of excess power available for sale may decrease versus non-outage years. Changes in purchased power costs and excess power available for sale are included in the FAC, which results in limited impacts to earnings. In addition, Ameren Missouri may incur increased non-nuclear energy center maintenance costs in non-outage years.•In December 2021, Ameren Missouri filed a motion with the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri to modify a September 2019 remedy order issued by the district court to allow the retirement of the Rush Island Energy Center in advance of its previously expected useful life in lieu of installing a flue gas desulfurization system. The March 31, 2024 compliance date contained in the district court’s September 2019 remedy order remains in effect unless extended by the district court. In 2022, in response to an Ameren Missouri request for a final, binding reliability assessment, the MISO designated the Rush Island Energy Center as a system support resource and concluded that certain mitigation measures, including transmission upgrades, should occur before the energy center is retired. The transmission upgrade projects have been approved by the MISO, and design and procurement activities necessary to complete the upgrades are underway. Ameren Missouri expects to complete the upgrades by mid-2025. In 2022, the FERC approved a system support resource agreement, which became effective as of September 1, 2022. The agreement details the manner of continued operation for a system support resource that results in operating during peak demand times and emergencies. The system support resource designation and the related agreement are subject to annual renewal and revision. In September 2022, the Rush Island Energy Center began operating consistent with the system support resource agreement. In addition, in October 2022, the FERC established hearing and settlement procedures in response to an August 2022 request from Ameren Missouri for recovery of non-energy costs under the related MISO tariff. The FERC is under no deadline to issue an order related to this proceeding. Revenues and costs under the MISO tariff are included in the FAC. The district court has the authority to determine the retirement date and operating parameters for the Rush Island Energy Center and is not bound by the MISO determination of the Rush Island Energy Center as a system support resource or the FERC’s approval. The district court is under no deadline to issue a ruling modifying the remedy order. For additional information on the NSR and Clean Air Act litigation, see Note 9 – Commitments and Contingencies under Part I, Item 1, of this report. In February 2022, the MoPSC issued an order directing the MoPSC staff to review Ameren Missouri’s planned accelerated retirement of the Rush Island Energy Center, including potential impacts on the reliability and cost of Ameren Missouri’s service to its customers; Ameren Missouri’s plans to mitigate the customer impacts of the accelerated retirement; and the prudence of Ameren Missouri’s actions and decisions with regard to the Rush Island Energy Center, among other things. In April 2022, the MoPSC staff filed an initial report with the MoPSC in which the staff concluded early retirement of the Rush Island Energy Center may cause reliability concerns. The MoPSC staff is under no deadline to complete this review. Since December 31, 2021, Ameren and Ameren Missouri classified the remaining net book value of the Rush Island Energy Center as plant to be abandoned, net, within “Property, Plant, and Equipment, Net” on Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s balance sheets. As part of the assessment of any potential future abandonment loss, consideration will be given to rate and securitization orders issued by the MoPSC to Ameren Missouri and to orders issued to other Missouri utilities with similar facts.•Pursuant to Illinois state law, Ameren Missouri’s natural gas-fired energy centers in Illinois are subject to limits on emissions, including CO2 and NOx, equal to their unit-specific average annual emissions from 2018 through 2020, for any rolling twelve-month period through 2029. Further reductions to emissions limits will become effective between 2030 and 2040, resulting in the closure of the Venice Energy Center by 2029. The reductions could also limit the operations of Ameren Missouri’s other four natural gas-fired energy centers located in the state of Illinois, and will result in their closure by 2040. These energy centers are utilized to support peak loads. Subject to certain conditions, these energy centers may be allowed to exceed the emissions limits in order to maintain reliability of electric utility service. •Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois continue to make infrastructure investments and expect to seek increases to electric and natural gas rates to recover the cost of investments and earn an adequate return. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois will also seek new, or to maintain existing, legislative solutions to address regulatory lag and to support investment in their utility infrastructure for the benefit of their customers. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois continue to face cost recovery pressures, including limited economic growth in their service territories, increasing inflation, higher cost of debt, customer conservation efforts, the impacts of additional customer energy-efficiency programs, and increased customer use of increasingly cost-effective advancements in innovative energy technologies, including private generation and energy storage. However, over the long-term, we expect the decreased demand to be partially offset by increased demand resulting from increased electrification of the economy and as a means to address economy-wide CO2 emission concerns. We expect that increased investments, including expected future investments for environmental compliance, system reliability improvements, and new generation sources, will result in rate base and revenue growth but also higher depreciation and financing costs.Liquidity and Capital Resources•Ameren Missouri’s preferred resource plan is included in its 2022 Change to the 2020 IRP. In connection with this plan, Ameren is targeting net-zero carbon emissions by 2045, as well as a 60% reduction by 2030 and an 85% reduction by 2040 based on 2005 levels. Ameren’s goals include both direct emissions from operations (scope 1), as well as electricity usage at Ameren buildings (scope 2), including other greenhouse gas emissions of methane, nitrous oxide, and sulfur hexafluoride. Achieving these goals will be dependent on a variety of factors, including cost-effective advancements in innovative clean energy technologies and constructive federal and state energy and economic policies. The 2022 Change to the 2020 IRP includes, among other things, the following:•the continued implementation of customer energy-efficiency programs;•expanding renewable sources by adding 2,800 MWs of renewable generation by 2030, 400 MWs of battery storage by 2035, and a total of 4,700 MWs of renewable generation and 800 MWs of battery storage by 2040. These amounts include the solar generation projects discussed below;•adding 1,200 MWs of natural gas-fired combined cycle generation by 2031, with plans to switch to hydrogen fuel and/or blend hydrogen fuel with natural gas and install carbon capture technology if these technologies become commercially available at a reasonable cost;•adding 1,200 MWs of additional clean dispatchable generation by 2043;•the expectation that Ameren Missouri will seek and receive NRC approval for an extension of the operating license for the Callaway Energy Center beyond its current 2044 expiration date;•extending the retirement date of the coal-fired Sioux Energy Center from 2028 to 2030 to ensure reliability during the transition to clean energy generation, which is subject to the approval of a change in the asset’s depreciable life by the MoPSC in Ameren Missouri’s 2022 electric service regulatory rate review;•accelerating the retirement date of the Rush Island coal-fired energy center to 2025;•retiring the Meramec coal-fired energy center at the end of its useful life in 2022, which was completed in December 2022;•retiring the generating units at the Labadie coal-fired energy center at the end of their useful lives (two generating units by 2036 and the other two by 2042);•accelerating the retirement date of the Venice natural gas-fired energy center to 2029; and•retiring Ameren Missouri’s other natural gas-fired energy centers in Illinois by 2040.Ameren Missouri’s plan could be affected by, among other factors: Ameren Missouri’s ability to obtain CCNs from the MoPSC, and any other required approvals for the addition of renewable resources or natural gas-fired combined cycle generation, retirement of energy centers, and new or continued customer energy-efficiency programs; the ability to enter into agreements for renewable or natural gas-fired combined cycle generation and acquire or construct that generation at a reasonable cost; the ability of suppliers, contractors, and developers to meet contractual commitments and timely complete projects, which is dependent upon the availability of necessary labor, materials, and equipment, including those that are affected by the disruptions in the global supply chain caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, geopolitical conflict, or government actions, among other things; changes in the scope and timing of projects; the ability to qualify for, and use or transfer, federal production or investment tax credits; the cost of wind, solar, and other renewable generation and battery storage technologies; the cost of natural gas or hydrogen CT technologies; the ability to maintain system reliability during and after the transition to clean energy generation; changes in environmental regulations, including those related to CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions; energy prices and demand; Ameren Missouri’s ability to obtain necessary rights-of-way, easements, and transmission interconnection agreements at an acceptable cost and in a timely fashion, the inability to earn an adequate return on invested capital; and the ability to raise capital on reasonable terms. The next integrated resource plan is expected to be filed in September 2023.•Missouri law allows Missouri electric utility companies to petition the MoPSC for a financing order to authorize the issuance of securitized utility tariff bonds to finance the cost of retiring electric generation facilities before the end of their useful lives. In connection with the planned accelerated retirement of the Rush Island Energy Center due to the NSR and Clean Air Act Litigation discussed above, Ameren Missouri expects to seek approval from the MoPSC to finance the costs associated with the retirement, including the remaining unrecovered net plant balance associated with the facility, through the issuance of securitized utility tariff bonds.•During 2022 and 2023, Ameren Missouri entered into agreements to acquire and/or construct various solar generation facilities. The following table provides information with respect to each solar generation facility:
(a)The Boomtown Solar Project is expected to support Ameren Missouri’s transition to renewable energy generation and serve customers under the Renewable Solutions Program.(b)The Huck Finn Solar project is expected to support Ameren Missouri’s compliance with the state of Missouri’s requirement of achieving 15% of retail sales from renewable energy sources, of which 2% must be derived from solar energy sources.(c)The Vandalia Solar Project is expected to support Ameren Missouri’s transition to renewable energy generation.(d)Ameren Missouri entered into an engineering, supply, and construction agreement to construct the Vandalia Solar Project.(e)Because Ameren Missouri will develop and construct the Vandalia Solar Project, there is no acquisition requiring FERC approval.(f)Expected completion dates are dependent on the timing of regulatory approvals.(g)Expected completion dates are dependent on the impact of potential sourcing issues discussed below.All of the solar projects above are aligned with the 2022 Change to the 2020 IRP discussed above, and are subject to certain conditions, including approval by the FERC for the Boomtown Solar Project and the issuance of a CCN by the MoPSC for the Vandalia Solar Project. Capital expenditures related to these facilities are included in Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s expected capital investments discussed below.•Ameren Missouri's 2022 Change to the 2020 IRP targets cleaner and more diverse sources of energy generation, including solar generation. While rights to acquire and/or construct the solar facilities discussed above were secured through agreements, supply chain disruptions, including solar panel shortages and increasing material costs as a result of government tariffs and other factors, could affect the costs, as well as the timing, of these projects and other solar generation projects. The supply of solar panel components to the United States was significantly disrupted as a result of an investigation initiated by the United States Department of Commerce in late March 2022, which could result in significant tariffs on solar panel components imported from four Southeast Asian countries. The investigation is in response to a petition, which alleged that Chinese solar manufacturers shifted solar panel component manufacturing to these countries to avoid tariffs imposed on imports from China. In December 2022, the United States Department of Commerce issued a preliminary determination, finding that all exporters and producers of solar panel components from the four Southeast Asian countries, with a few exceptions, have been circumventing tariffs imposed on imports from China. As a result of the preliminary determination, importers and exporters may avoid the imposition of increased tariffs by certifying to the United States Department of Commerce that the entry of solar panel components into the United States are not subject to the investigation or that they fall within the scope of the 24-month waiver of tariffs discussed below. Failure to submit the applicable certifications, or denial of the submitted certifications by the United States Department of Commerce, could result in increased tariffs on solar panel components that are subject to the investigation and entered the United States on or after April 1, 2022. The United States Department of Commerce is expected to issue a final determination by mid-August 2023. Additionally, certain solar panel components from China have been subject to detention by the United States Customs and Border Protection Agency as a result of the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act that became effective in June 2022. Also, in June 2022, President Biden authorized the United States Department of Energy to use the Defense Production Act to rapidly expand American manufacturing of five critical clean energy technologies, including solar panel components. President Biden also took executive action to temporarily lift certain tariffs on solar panel components imported from the four Southeast Asian countries under investigation by the United States Department of Commerce for 24 months in order to allow the United States access to a sufficient supply of solar panel components to meet electricity generation needs while domestic manufacturing scales up. Any future tariffs or other outcomes resulting from the investigation by the United States Department of Commerce or actions by the United States Customs and Border Protection Agency could affect the cost and the availability of solar panel components and the timing and amount of Ameren Missouri's estimated capital expenditures associated with solar generation investments.•Through 2027, we expect to make significant capital expenditures to improve our electric and natural gas utility infrastructure, with a major portion directed to our transmission and distribution systems. We estimate that we will invest up to $20.5 billion (Ameren Missouri – up to $10.8 billion; Ameren Illinois – up to $9.5 billion; ATXI – up to $0.2 billion) of capital expenditures during the period from 2023 through 2027. These planned investments are based on the assumption of continued constructive regulatory frameworks. Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s estimates include $2.5 billion of renewable generation investments through 2027 consistent with investments outlined in Ameren Missouri’s 2022 Change to the 2020 IRP. Ameren’s estimate also includes $0.8 billion of capital expenditures through 2027 related to projects assigned to Ameren pursuant to the first tranche of projects under the MISO’s long-range transmission planning roadmap discussed below.•In 2021, the MISO issued a report outlining a preliminary long-range transmission planning roadmap of projects through 2039, which considers the rapidly changing generation mix within MISO resulting from significant additions of renewable generation, actual and expected generation plant closures, and state mandates or goals for clean energy or carbon emissions reductions. In July 2022, the MISO approved the first tranche of projects under the first phase of the roadmap. A portion of these projects were assigned to various utilities, of which Ameren was awarded projects that are estimated to cost approximately $1.8 billion, based on the MISO’s cost estimate. Construction on the Ameren projects is expected to begin in 2025, with completion dates expected near the end of this decade. The MISO initiated requests for proposals for additional first tranche competitive bid projects in December 2022, with proposals due in May 2023, and is expected to initiate additional requests for proposals in June and July 2023, with proposals due in November and October 2023, respectively. These competitive-bid projects are estimated by the MISO to cost approximately $0.7 billion and are expected to be awarded between late-2023 and mid-2024. In November 2022, the MISO released plans for a second tranche of projects and began the process of identifying a list of projects for consideration under this tranche. Ameren expects the second tranche of projects to be approved in the first half of 2024. In July 2022, a group of industrial customers filed a complaint with the FERC, challenging provisions of a MISO tariff that exclude regional transmission projects from the MISO’s competitive bid process based on state laws related to the right of first refusal, which provide an incumbent utility the right to build, maintain, and own transmission lines located within its service territory. The complaint seeks to require MISO to revise its tariff to prohibit the application of state laws related to the right of first refusal in the MISO’s long-range transmission planning and require projects to be bid on a competitive basis, to the maximum extent possible. It also is asking for refunds related to any costs under the tariff that would not comply with the sought-after revisions. The FERC is under no deadline to issue an order in this proceeding.•In July 2022, an Illinois law prohibiting the state’s oversight of certain electric utilities’ choice of RTO membership ceased to be effective. Given the change in law and the high prices resulting from MISO’s April 2022 capacity auction, the ICC issued an order requiring Ameren Illinois to perform a cost-benefit study of continued participation in the MISO compared to participation in PJM Interconnection LLC, another RTO. The cost-benefit study will examine the impacts of participation in each RTO, including reliability, resiliency, affordability, and environmental impacts, among other things, for a period of five to 10 years beginning June 2024. The ICC order requires Ameren Illinois to file the study by July 2023. A 30-day comment period will follow. The ICC is under no obligation to issue an order related to the cost-benefit study.•Environmental regulations, including those related to CO2 emissions, or other actions taken by the EPA or state regulators, or requirements that may result from the NSR and Clean Air Act Litigation discussed in Note 9 – Commitments and Contingencies under Part I, Item 1, of this report, could result in significant increases in capital expenditures and operating costs. Regulations can be reviewed and repealed, and replacement or alternative regulations can be proposed or adopted by the current federal administration, including the EPA. The ultimate implementation of any of these new regulations, as well as the timing of any such implementation, is uncertain. However, the individual or combined effects of existing and new environmental regulations could result in significant capital expenditures, increased operating costs, or the closure or alteration of some of Ameren Missouri’s coal and natural gas-fired energy centers. Ameren Missouri’s capital expenditures are subject to MoPSC prudence reviews, which could result in cost disallowances as well as regulatory lag. The cost of Ameren Illinois’ purchased power and natural gas purchased for resale could increase. However, Ameren Illinois expects that these costs would be recovered from customers with no material adverse effect on its results of operations, financial position, or liquidity. Ameren’s and Ameren Missouri’s earnings could benefit from increased investment to comply with environmental regulations if those investments are reflected and recovered on a timely basis in customer rates.•The Ameren Companies have multiyear credit agreements that cumulatively provide $2.6 billion of credit through December 2027, subject to a 364-day repayment term for Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois, with the option to seek incremental commitments to increase the cumulative credit provided to $3.2 billion. See Note 3 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part I, Item 1, of this report and Note 4 – Short-term Debt and Liquidity under Part II, Item 8, in the Form 10-K for additional information regarding the Credit Agreements. See Note 5 – Long-Term Debt and Equity Financings under Part II, Item 8, in the Form 10-K for long-term debt maturities from 2023 to 2027 and beyond at Ameren (parent), Ameren Missouri, Ameren Illinois, and ATXI. Ameren, Ameren Missouri, and Ameren Illinois each believe that their liquidity is adequate given their respective expected operating cash flows, capital expenditures, and financing plans, and expect to continue to have access to the capital and credit markets on reasonable terms when needed. However, there can be no assurance that significant changes in economic conditions, disruptions in the capital and credit markets, or other unforeseen events will not materially affect their ability to execute their expected operating, capital, or financing plans.•Ameren expects its cash used for currently planned capital expenditures and dividends to exceed cash provided by operating activities over the next several years. As part of its funding plan for capital expenditures, Ameren is using newly issued shares of common stock, rather than market-purchased shares, to satisfy requirements under the DRPlus and employee benefit plans and expects to continue to do so through at least 2027. Ameren expects these equity issuances to total about $100 million annually. In addition, Ameren has an ATM program under which Ameren may offer and sell from time to time common stock, which includes the ability to enter into forward sales agreements, subject to market conditions and other factors. As of April 30, 2023, Ameren has multiple forward sale agreements outstanding under the ATM program with various counterparties relating to 3.8 million shares of common stock. Ameren expects to settle approximately $300 million of the forward sale agreements with physical delivery of 3.2 million shares of common stock by December 31, 2023. Also, Ameren plans to issue approximately $500 million of equity each year from 2024 to 2027, in addition to issuances under the DRPlus and employee benefit plans. As of March 31, 2023, Ameren had approximately $980 million of common stock available for sale under the ATM program, which takes into account the forward sale agreements in effect as of March 31, 2023. Ameren expects its equity to total capitalization to be about 45% through December 31, 2027, with the long-term intent to support solid investment-grade credit ratings. Ameren Missouri and Ameren Illinois expect to fund cash flow needs through debt issuances, adjustments of dividends to Ameren (parent), and/or capital contributions from Ameren (parent).•The IRA was enacted in August 2022, and includes various income tax provisions, among other things. The law extends federal production and investment tax credits for projects beginning construction through 2024 and allows for a 10% adder to the production and investment tax credits for siting projects at existing energy communities as defined in the law, which includes sites previously used for coal-fired generation. The law also creates clean energy tax credits for projects placed in service after 2024. The clean energy tax credits will apply to renewable energy production and investments, along with certain nuclear energy production, and will be phased out beginning in 2033, at the earliest. The phase-out is triggered when greenhouse gas emissions from the electric generation industry are reduced by at least 75% from the annual 2022 emission rate or at the beginning of 2033, whichever is later. The law allows for transferability to an unrelated party for cash of up to 100% of certain tax credits generated after 2022. In addition, the new law imposes a 15% minimum tax on adjusted financial statement income, as defined in the law, for corporations whose average annual adjusted financial statement income exceeds $1 billion for three consecutive preceding tax years effective for tax years beginning after December 31, 2022. Once a corporation exceeds this three-year average annual adjusted financial statement income threshold, it will be subject to the minimum tax for all future tax years. Additional regulations, interpretations, amendments, or technical corrections to or in connection with the IRA are expected to be issued by the IRS or United States Department of Treasury, which may impact the timing of when the 15% minimum tax becomes applicable for Ameren as discussed below.•As of March 31, 2023, Ameren had $184 million in tax benefits from federal and state income tax credit carryforwards and $48 million in tax benefits from federal and state net operating loss carryforwards, which will be utilized in future periods. Future expected income tax payments are based on expected taxable income, available income tax credit and net operating loss carryforwards, and current tax law. Expected taxable income is affected by expected capital expenditures, when property, plant, and equipment is placed in-service or retired, and the timing of regulatory reviews, among other things. Ameren expects federal income tax payments at the required minimum levels from 2023 to 2027 resulting from the anticipated use of existing production tax credits generated by Ameren Missouri’s High Prairie Renewable and Atchison Renewable energy centers, existing income tax credit and net operating loss carryforwards, and outstanding refunds. Based on its preliminary calculations, Ameren does not expect to be subject to the 15% minimum tax on adjusted financial statement income imposed by the IRA in 2023 and 2024. Ameren expects annual federal income tax payments, including payments related to the 15% minimum tax pursuant to the IRA, to be immaterial through 2027.The above items could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity. Additionally, in the ordinary course of business, we evaluate strategies to enhance our results of operations, financial position, and liquidity. These strategies may include acquisitions, divestitures, opportunities to reduce costs or increase revenues, and other strategic initiatives to increase Ameren’s shareholder value. We are unable to predict which, if any, of these initiatives will be executed. The execution of these initiatives may have a material impact on our future results of operations, financial position, or liquidity.
See Note 2 – Rate and Regulatory Matters under Part I, Item 1, of this report.