
Some of the information presented in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, including the documents incorporated by reference herein, may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations, which are in turn based on assumptions that we believe are reasonable based on our current knowledge of our business and operations. We have used words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “should,” “would,” “will” and variations of such words and similar expressions to identify such forward-looking statements.These forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions, which are difficult to predict and many of which are beyond our control. There can be no assurance that our actual results will not differ materially from the results and expectations expressed or implied in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the outlook expressed or implied in any forward-looking statement include, without limitation, information related to:•changes in economic and business conditions;•product development;•changes in financial and operating performance of our major customers and industries and markets served by us;•the timing of orders received from customers;•the gain or loss of significant customers;•fluctuations in lithium market pricing, which could impact our revenues and profitability particularly due to our increased exposure to index-referenced and variable-priced contracts for battery grade lithium sales;•inflationary trends in our input costs, such as raw materials, transportation and energy, and their effects on our business and financial results;•changes with respect to contract renegotiations;•potential production volume shortfalls;•competition from other manufacturers;•changes in the demand for our products or the end-user markets in which our products are sold;•limitations or prohibitions on the manufacture and sale of our products;•availability of raw materials;•increases in the cost of raw materials and energy, and our ability to pass through such increases to our customers;•technological change and development;•changes in our markets in general;•fluctuations in foreign currencies;•changes in laws and government regulation impacting our operations or our products;•the occurrence of regulatory actions, proceedings, claims or litigation (including with respect to the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act and foreign anti-corruption laws);•the occurrence of cyber-security breaches, terrorist attacks, industrial accidents or natural disasters;•the effects of climate change, including any regulatory changes to which we might be subject;•hazards associated with chemicals manufacturing;•the inability to maintain current levels of insurance, including product or premises liability insurance, or the denial of such coverage;•political unrest affecting the global economy, including adverse effects from terrorism or hostilities;•political instability affecting our manufacturing operations or joint ventures;•changes in accounting standards;•the inability to achieve results from our global manufacturing cost reduction initiatives as well as our ongoing continuous improvement and rationalization programs;•changes in the jurisdictional mix of our earnings and changes in tax laws and rates or interpretation;•changes in monetary policies, inflation or interest rates that may impact our ability to raise capital or increase our cost of funds, impact the performance of our pension fund investments and increase our pension expense and funding obligations;•volatility and uncertainties in the debt and equity markets;•technology or intellectual property infringement, including cyber-security breaches, and other innovation risks;•decisions we may make in the future;•future acquisition and divestiture transactions, including the ability to successfully execute, operate and integrate acquisitions and divestitures and incurring additional indebtedness;•expected benefits from proposed transactions;•timing of active and proposed projects;•continuing uncertainties as to the duration and impact of the novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) pandemic and any future pandemic;•impacts of the military conflict between Russia and Ukraine and the global response to it;•performance of our partners in joint ventures and other projects;•changes in credit ratings;•the inability to realize the benefits of our decision to retain our Ketjen business as a wholly-owned subsidiary and to realign our Lithium and Bromine global business units into a new corporate structure, including Energy Storage and Specialties business units; and•the other factors detailed from time to time in the reports we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. We assume no obligation to provide any revisions to any forward-looking statements should circumstances change, except as otherwise required by securities and other applicable laws. The following discussion should be read together with our condensed consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.The following is a discussion and analysis of our results of operations for the three-month periods ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. A discussion of our consolidated financial condition and sources of additional capital is included under a separate heading “Financial Condition and Liquidity.”
We are a leading global developer, manufacturer and marketer of highly-engineered specialty chemicals that are designed to meet our customers’ needs across a diverse range of end markets. Our corporate purpose is making the world safe and sustainable by powering the potential of people. The end markets we serve include energy storage, petroleum refining, consumer electronics, construction, automotive, lubricants, pharmaceuticals and crop protection. We believe that our commercial and geographic diversity, technical expertise, access to high-quality resources, innovative capability, flexible, low-cost global manufacturing base, experienced management team and strategic focus on our core base technologies will enable us to maintain leading positions in those areas of the specialty chemicals industry in which we operate.Secular trends favorably impacting demand within the end markets that we serve combined with our diverse product portfolio, broad geographic presence and customer-focused solutions will continue to be key drivers of our future earnings growth. We continue to build upon our existing green solutions portfolio and our ongoing mission to provide innovative, yet commercially viable, clean energy products and services to the marketplace to contribute to our sustainable revenue. For example, our Energy Storage business contributes to the growth of clean miles driven with electric vehicles and more efficient use of renewable energy through grid storage; Specialties enables the prevention of fires starting in electronic equipment, greater fuel efficiency from rubber tires and the reduction of emissions from coal fired power plants; and the Ketjen business creates efficiency of natural resources through more usable products from a single barrel of oil, enables safer, greener production of alkylates used to produce more environmentally-friendly fuels, and reduced emissions through cleaner transportation fuels. We believe our disciplined cost reduction efforts and ongoing productivity improvements, among other factors, position us well to take advantage of strengthening economic conditions as they occur, while softening the negative impact of the current challenging global economic environment.
During the first quarter of 2023:•Our board of directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.40 per share on February 23, 2023, which was paid on April 3, 2023 to shareholders of record at the close of business as of March 17, 2023.•We announced the official brand launch of Ketjen, a wholly owned subsidiary, previously known as the Catalysts reportable segment.•We realigned our Lithium and Bromine global business units into a new corporate structure designed to better meet customer needs and foster talent required to deliver in a competitive global environment. This resulted in the following three reportable segments: (1) Energy Storage; (2) Specialties; and (3) Ketjen.•We announced agreements to restructure the MARBL joint venture in Australia and investment by Mineral Resources Limited (“MRL”) in certain of our conversion assets in China. The agreements will, among other things: (1) increase our interest in the first two conversion trains of the Kemerton processing plant from 60% to 85%; (2) increase MRL’s interest in the Wodgina Lithium Mine Project from 40% to 50%; (3) commit MRL to fund 50% of the capital costs for downstream conversion capacity we nominate to process Wodgina spodumene; and (4) provide MRL with a 50% interest in our Qinzhou and Meishan plants in China. This agreement restructuring will be completed in phases and is subject to regulatory approval.•We announced plans to construct a new $1.3 billion lithium mega-flex processing facility in South Carolina capable of annually producing approximately 50,000 metric tonnes of battery-grade lithium hydroxide, with the potential to expand up to 100,000 metric tonnes. Construction is expected to begin in late 2024.•Our net sales for the quarter were $2.6 billion, an increase of 129% compared to net sales of $1.1 billion in the first quarter of 2022. •Diluted earnings per share was $10.51, compared to $2.15 in the first quarter of 2022.
The current global business environment presents a diverse set of opportunities and challenges in the markets we serve. In particular, the market for lithium battery and energy storage, particularly for electric vehicles (“EVs”), remains strong, providing the opportunity to continue to develop high quality and innovative products while managing the high cost of expanding capacity. The other markets we serve continue to present various opportunities for value and growth as we have positioned ourselves to manage the impact on our business of changing global conditions, such as slow and uneven global growth, currency exchange volatility, crude oil price fluctuation, a dynamic pricing environment, an ever-changing landscape in electronics, the continuous need for cutting edge catalysts and technology by our refinery customers and increasingly stringent environmental standards. Amidst these dynamics, we believe our business fundamentals are sound and that we are strategically well-positioned as we remain focused on increasing sales volumes, optimizing and improving the value of our portfolio primarily through pricing and product development, managing costs and delivering value to our customers and shareholders. We believe that our businesses remain well-positioned to capitalize on new business opportunities and long-term trends driving growth within our end markets and to respond quickly to changes in economic conditions in these markets.Beginning in the first quarter of 2023, the chief operating decision maker began evaluating performance, forecasting and making resource allocation decisions based on our previously announced realignment of the Lithium and Bromine global business units. The new corporate structure was designed to better meet customer needs and foster talent required to deliver in a competitive global environment. The realignment resulted in the following three reportable segments: (1) Energy Storage; (2) Specialties; and (3) Ketjen.Energy Storage: We expect Energy Storage results to increase year-over-year in 2023, mainly due to increased pricing as well as higher sales volume. The increased market pricing reflects tight market conditions, primarily in battery- and tech-grade carbonate and hydroxide, as well as renegotiations of certain of our long-term agreements. Some of our renegotiated contracts include higher prices on existing long-term agreements that are more reflective of current market conditions. In other cases, we have moved from previous fixed-price, long-term agreements towards index-referenced and variable-priced contracts. As a result, our Energy Storage business is more aligned with changes in market and index pricing than it has been in the past. Lithium pricing remains higher than the beginning of 2022, however, it has recently declined, which could impact results during the remainder of 2023. While we expect these prices to remain strong throughout the year, a material decline in these market prices would have a negative impact on our outlook. The increased sales volume is primarily expected from new capacity coming on line from La Negra, Chile, Kemerton, Western Australia, and Qinzhou, China, as well as additional tolling volume supported by increased spodumene production out of Australia. While we ramp up our new capacity, we will continue to utilize tolling arrangements to meet growing customer demand. EV sales are expected to continue to increase over the prior year as the lithium battery market remains strong.In 2022, we announced agreements for a strategic investment in China with plans to build a battery grade lithium conversion plant in Meishan initially targeting 50,000 metric tons of LCE per year. Construction of the Meishan facility is currently underway and is expected to be completed in 2024. In addition, we announced agreements to restructure the MARBL joint venture in Australia and investment by MRL in certain of our conversion assets in China. The agreements will, among other things: (1) increase our interest in the first two conversion trains of the Kemerton processing plant from 60% to 85%; (2) increase MRL’s interest in the Wodgina Lithium Mine Project from 40% to 50%; (3) commit MRL to fund 50% of the capital costs for downstream conversion capacity we nominate to process Wodgina spodumene; and (4) provide MRL with a 50% interest in our Qinzhou and Meishan plants in China. This agreement restructuring will be completed in phases and is subject to regulatory approval.On a longer-term basis, we believe that demand for lithium will continue to grow as new lithium applications advance and the use of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles and full battery electric vehicles increases. This demand for lithium is supported by a favorable backdrop of steadily declining lithium-ion battery costs, increasing battery performance, continuing significant investments in the battery and EV supply chain by cathode and battery producers and automotive OEMs and favorable global public policy toward e-mobility/renewable energy usage. Our outlook is also bolstered by long-term supply agreements with key strategic customers, reflecting our standing as a preferred global lithium partner, highlighted by our scale, access to geographically diverse, low-cost resources and long-term track record of reliability of supply and operating execution.Specialties: We expect both net sales and profitability to increase in 2023 due to volume growth in the second half of the year benefiting from diverse end markets. One anticipated contributor to growth is the December 2022 launch of MercLok, a groundbreaking new bromine-based product that sequesters elemental and ionic mercury in the environment. Volumes are expected to increase compared to 2022 due to the continued successful execution of growth projects, assuming continued availability of raw materials like chlorine. In addition, Specialties’ ongoing cost savings initiatives and higher pricing are expected to offset higher freight and raw material costs such as lithium chloride.On a longer-term basis, we continue to believe that improving global standards of living, widespread digitization, increasing demand for data management capacity and the potential for increasingly stringent fire safety regulations in developing markets are likely to drive continued demand for fire safety products. We are focused on profitably growing our globally competitive bromine and derivatives production network to serve all major bromine consuming products and markets. The combination of our solid, long-term business fundamentals, strong cost position, product innovations and effective management of raw material costs should enable us to manage our business through end-market challenges and to capitalize on opportunities that are expected with favorable market trends in select end markets.Ketjen: Total Ketjen results in 2023 are expected to increase year-over-year despite inflationary pressures in freight and input costs, including the volatility of natural gas pricing in Europe related to the war in Ukraine. These higher costs are expected to be offset by higher pricing in refining markets. Volume is expected to grow across each of the Ketjen businesses. The fluidized catalytic cracking (“FCC”) market has recovered from the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of increased travel and depletion of global gasoline inventories. Hydroprocessing catalysts (“HPC”) demand tends to be lumpier than FCC demand, but is expected to see a prolonged recovery due to refineries pushing out turnarounds. In addition, the Ketjen business is seeking contingent business interruption insurance settlements for lost income from 2019 to 2022 due to multiple incidents with one of its customers. If we prevail with these claims, we could receive these settlements in multiple distributions in 2023, totaling up to an additional $37 million. Our decision to retain this business as a separate, wholly-owned subsidiary is intended to better meet customer needs and foster talent required to deliver in a competitive global environment.On a longer-term basis, we believe increased global demand for transportation fuels, new refinery start-ups and ongoing adoption of cleaner fuels will be the primary drivers of growth in our Ketjen business. We believe delivering superior end-use performance continues to be the most effective way to create sustainable value in the refinery catalysts industry. We also believe our technologies continue to provide significant performance and financial benefits to refiners challenged to meet tighter regulations around the world, including those managing new contaminants present in North America tight oil, and those in the Middle East and Asia seeking to use heavier feedstock while pushing for higher propylene yields. Longer-term, we believe that the global crude supply will get heavier and more sour, a trend that bodes well for our catalysts portfolio. With superior technology and production capacities, and expected growth in end market demand, we believe that Ketjen remains well-positioned for the future. In performance catalyst solutions (“PCS”), we expect growth on a longer-term basis in our organometallics business due to growing global demand for plastics driven by rising standards of living and infrastructure spending.Corporate: In the first quarter of 2023, we increased our quarterly dividend rate to $0.40 per share. We continue to focus on cash generation, working capital management and process efficiencies. We expect our global effective tax rate will vary based on the locales in which income is actually earned and remains subject to potential volatility from changing legislation in the United States, such as the Inflation Reduction Act and the CHIPS and Science Act of 2022, and other tax jurisdictions.We remain committed to evaluating the merits of any opportunities that may arise for acquisitions or other business development activities that will complement our business footprint. Additional information regarding our products, markets and financial performance is provided at our website, www.albemarle.com. Our website is not a part of this document nor is it incorporated herein by reference.
The following data and discussion provides an analysis of certain significant factors affecting our results of operations during the periods included in the accompanying consolidated statements of income.
Segment Information Overview. We have identified three reportable segments according to the nature and economic characteristics of our products as well as the manner in which the information is used internally by the Company’s chief operating decision maker to evaluate performance and make resource allocation decisions. Effective January 1, 2023 our reportable business segments consisted of: (1) Energy Storage, (2) Specialties and (3) Ketjen.The Corporate category is not considered to be a segment and includes corporate-related items not allocated to the operating segments. Pension and OPEB service cost (which represents the benefits earned by active employees during the period) and amortization of prior service cost or benefit are allocated to the reportable segments, All Other, and Corporate, whereas the remaining components of pension and OPEB benefits cost or credit (“Non-operating pension and OPEB items”) are included in Corporate. Segment data includes intersegment transfers of raw materials at cost and allocations for certain corporate costs.Our chief operating decision maker uses adjusted EBITDA (as defined below) to assess the ongoing performance of the Company’s business segments and to allocate resources. We define adjusted EBITDA as earnings before interest and financing expenses, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, as adjusted on a consistent basis for certain non-operating, non-recurring or unusual items in a balanced manner and on a segment basis. These non-operating, non-recurring or unusual items may include acquisition and integration-related costs, gains or losses on sales of businesses, restructuring charges, facility divestiture charges, certain litigation and arbitration costs and charges, non-operating pension and OPEB items and other significant non-recurring items. In addition, management uses adjusted EBITDA for business planning purposes and as a significant component in the calculation of performance-based compensation for management and other employees. We reported adjusted EBITDA because management believes it provides transparency to investors and enables period-to-period comparability of financial performance. Total adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure that is not required by, or presented in accordance with, the generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). Total adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as an alternative to Net (loss) income attributable to Albemarle Corporation, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, or any other financial measure reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
See below for a reconciliation of total segment adjusted EBITDA to consolidated Net income attributable to Albemarle Corporation, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP (in thousands):
(a)Included in Interest and financing expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2022 is the correction of an out of period error of $17.5 million related to the overstatement of capitalized interest in prior periods.(b)Expense recorded as a result of revised estimates of the obligation to construct certain lithium hydroxide conversion assets in Kemerton, Western Australia, due to cost overruns from supply chain, labor and COVID-19 pandemic related issues. The corresponding obligation was recorded in Accrued liabilities to be transferred to MRL, which maintains a 40% ownership interest in these Kemerton assets.(c)Costs related to the acquisition, integration and potential divestitures for various significant projects, recorded in SG&A.(d)Gain recorded in Other income, net for the three months ended March 31, 2023, resulting from the increase in fair value of investments in public equity securities.(e)Included amounts for the three months ended March 31, 2023 recorded in:•SG&A - $1.9 million of charges primarily for environmental reserves at sites not part of our operations and $0.7 million of facility closure expenses related to offices in Germany.•Other income, net - $3.6 million of charges for asset retirement obligations at a site not part of our operations.Included amounts for the three months ended March 31, 2022 recorded in:•SG&A - $4.3 million of gains from the sale of legacy properties not part of our operations, partially offset by $2.8 million of charges for environmental reserves at sites not part of our operations and $0.7 million of facility closure expenses related to offices in Germany.•Other income, net - $0.6 million gain related to a settlement received from a legal matter in a prior period.
The principal uses of cash in our business generally have been capital investments and resource development costs, funding working capital, and service of debt. We also make contributions to our defined benefit pension plans, pay dividends to our shareholders and have the ability to repurchase shares of our common stock. Historically, cash to fund the needs of our business has been principally provided by cash from operations, debt financing and equity issuances.We are continually focused on working capital efficiency particularly in the areas of accounts receivable, payables and inventory. We anticipate that cash on hand, cash provided by operating activities, proceeds from divestitures and borrowings will be sufficient to pay our operating expenses, satisfy debt service obligations, fund capital expenditures and other investing activities, fund pension contributions and pay dividends for the foreseeable future.
During the first three months of 2023, cash on hand and cash provided by operations funded $415.6 million of capital expenditures for plant, machinery and equipment and dividends to shareholders of $46.3 million. Our operations provided $721.0 million of cash flows during the first three months of 2023, as compared to $206.2 million for the first three months of 2022. The change compared to prior year was primarily due to increased earnings from the Energy Storage segment and higher dividends received from unconsolidated investments, partially offset by an increase in working capital of $544.7 million. The outflow from working capital in 2023 was primarily driven by increased inventory and accounts receivable balances from higher lithium pricing and increased sales. This was partially offset by increased accounts payable which includes the higher pricing on lithium spodumene purchases from our Talison joint venture. Overall, our cash and cash equivalents increased by $87.6 million to $1.6 billion at March 31, 2023 from $1.5 billion at December 31, 2022.Capital expenditures for the three-month period ended March 31, 2023 of $415.6 million were primarily associated with plant, machinery and equipment. We expect our capital expenditures to be between $1.7 billion and $1.9 billion in 2023, primarily for Energy Storage growth and capacity increases, including in Australia, Chile, China and Silver Peak, Nevada, as well as productivity and continuity of operations projects in all segments. Train I of our Kemerton, Western Australia plant is complete and ramping through the commissioning stage. Train II has achieved mechanical completion and transitioned to the commissioning stage, with commercial sales volume from Train II expected to begin in 2023. In addition, construction of our announced lithium conversion plant in Meishan, China is progressing on schedule, with estimated completion in 2024.On February 22, 2023, the Company announced that it has signed definitive agreements with MRL to restructure the MARBL joint venture and separately for MRL to invest in our conversion assets in China. In Australia, we will increase our interest in the first two conversion trains of the Kemerton processing plant from 60% to 85%. We will operate Kemerton trains 1 and 2 on behalf of the joint venture. MRL will increase its interest in the Wodgina Lithium Mine Project from 40% to 50%. MRL will operate the Wodgina mine on behalf of the joint venture. Consideration for our increased stake in Kemerton will be offset by consideration for MRL's increased stake in Wodgina.In China, MRL will acquire a 50% interest in Albemarle's Qinzhou and Meishan plants. Qinzhou has a designed annual capacity of up to 25,000 metric tonnes of LCE. The plant will undergo modifications to be able to convert Wodgina spodumene and is expected to commence that conversion in early 2024. The Meishan plant, which is under construction with a designed annual capacity of 50,000 metric tonnes of LCE, is scheduled to be completed in 2024. We will continue to operate Meishan and Qinzhou. In addition, MRL committed to fund 50% of the capital costs for downstream conversion capacity. MRL is expected to pay approximately $350 million for its initial share of capital costs of this conversion capacity at closing. We expect to pay MRL a completion adjustment currently estimated to be $100 million to $150 million reflecting a retroactive effective date of April 1, 2022.These transactions are expected to close in stages beginning in the second quarter of 2023 and are subject to regulatory approval and other customary closing conditions. At this time the Company expects to record a gain as a result of these transactions in the period it closes.Net current assets were $3.2 billion and $2.4 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The increase is primarily due to increased inventory and accounts receivable balances from higher lithium pricing. Additional changes in the components of net current assets are primarily due to the timing of the sale of goods and other ordinary transactions leading up to the balance sheet dates. The additional changes are not the result of any policy changes by the Company, and do not reflect any change in either the quality of our net current assets or our expectation of success in converting net working capital to cash in the ordinary course of business.On February 23, 2023, we increased our quarterly dividend rate to $0.40 per share, an increase from the quarterly rate of $0.395 per share paid in 2022. The cash dividend declared on February 23, 2023 was paid on April 3, 2023 to shareholders of record at the close of business as of March 17, 2023.At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, our cash and cash equivalents included $1.2 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively, held by our foreign subsidiaries. The majority of these foreign cash balances are associated with earnings that we have asserted are indefinitely reinvested and which we plan to use to support our continued growth plans outside the U.S. through funding of capital expenditures, acquisitions, research, operating expenses or other similar cash needs of our foreign operations. From time to time, we repatriate cash associated with earnings from our foreign subsidiaries to the U.S. for normal operating needs through intercompany dividends, but only from subsidiaries whose earnings we have not asserted to be indefinitely reinvested or whose earnings qualify as “previously taxed income” as defined by the Internal Revenue Code. There were no repatriations of cash from foreign operations during the first three months of 2023 and 2022.While we continue to closely monitor our cash generation, working capital management and capital spending in light of continuing uncertainties in the global economy, we believe that we will continue to have the financial flexibility and capability to opportunistically fund future growth initiatives. Additionally, we anticipate that future capital spending, including business acquisitions, share repurchases and other cash outlays, should be financed primarily with cash flow provided by operations and cash on hand, with additional cash needed, if any, provided by borrowings. The amount and timing of any additional borrowings will depend on our specific cash requirements.
We currently have the following notes outstanding:
(a)    Denotes senior notes.Our senior notes are senior unsecured obligations and rank equally with all our other senior unsecured indebtedness from time to time outstanding. The notes are effectively subordinated to all of our existing or future secured indebtedness and to the existing and future indebtedness of our subsidiaries. As is customary for such long-term debt instruments, each series of notes outstanding has terms that allow us to redeem the notes before maturity, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of these notes to be redeemed, or (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal and interest thereon (exclusive of interest accrued to the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on a semi-annual basis using the comparable government rate (as defined in the indentures governing these notes) plus between 25 and 40 basis points, depending on the series of notes, plus, in each case, accrued interest thereon to the date of redemption. Holders may require us to purchase such notes at 101% upon a change of control triggering event, as defined in the indentures. These notes are subject to typical events of default, including bankruptcy and insolvency events, nonpayment and the acceleration of certain subsidiary indebtedness of $40 million or more caused by a nonpayment default.Our Euro notes issued in 2019 are unsecured and unsubordinated obligations and rank equally in right of payment to all our other unsecured senior obligations. The Euro notes are effectively subordinated to all of our existing or future secured indebtedness and to the existing and future indebtedness of our subsidiaries. As is customary for such long-term debt instruments, each series of notes outstanding has terms that allow us to redeem the notes before their maturity, in whole at any time or in part from time to time, at a redemption price equal to the greater of (i) 100% of the principal amount of the notes to be redeemed and (ii) the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments of principal thereof and interest thereon (exclusive of interest accrued to, but excluding, the date of redemption) discounted to the redemption date on an annual basis using the bond rate (as defined in the indentures governing these notes) plus between 25 and 35 basis points, depending on the series of notes, plus, in each case, accrued and unpaid interest on the principal amount being redeemed to, but excluding, the date of redemption. Holders may require us to purchase such notes at 101% upon a change of control triggering event, as defined in the indentures. These notes are subject to typical events of default, including bankruptcy and insolvency events, nonpayment and the acceleration of certain subsidiary indebtedness exceeding $100 million caused by a nonpayment default.On October 28, 2022, we amended our revolving, unsecured credit agreement (the “2018 Credit Agreement”), which provides for borrowings of up to $1.5 billion and matures on October 28, 2027. The 2018 Credit Agreement was originally dated as of June 21, 2018, and was previously amended on August 14, 2019, May 11, 2020 and December 10, 2021. Borrowings under the 2018 Credit Agreement bear interest at variable rates based on a benchmark rate depending on the currency in which the loans are denominated, plus an applicable margin which ranges from 0.910% to 1.375%, depending on the Company’s credit rating from Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services LLC (“S&P”), Moody’s Investors Services, Inc. (“Moody’s”) and Fitch Ratings, Inc. (“Fitch”). With respect to loans denominated in U.S. dollars, interest is calculated using the term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) plus a term SOFR adjustment of 0.10%, plus the applicable margin. The applicable margin on the facility was 1.125% as of March 31, 2023. As of March 31, 2023 there were no borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Credit Agreement.Borrowings under the 2018 Credit Agreement are conditioned upon satisfaction of certain conditions precedent, including the absence of defaults. The Company is subject to one financial covenant, as well as customary affirmative and negative covenants. The financial covenant requires that the Company’s consolidated net funded debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio (as such terms are defined in the 2018 Credit Agreement) be less than or equal to 3.50:1 for all fiscal quarters, subject to adjustments in accordance with the terms of the 2018 Credit Agreement relating to a consummation of an acquisition where the consideration includes cash proceeds from issuance of funded debt in excess of $500 million. The 2018 Credit Agreement also contains customary default provisions, including defaults for non-payment, breach of representations and warranties, insolvency, non-performance of covenants and cross-defaults to other material indebtedness. The occurrence of an event of default under the 2018 Credit Agreement could result in all loans and other obligations becoming immediately due and payable and the 2018 Credit Agreement being terminated.On May 29, 2013, we entered into agreements to initiate a commercial paper program on a private placement basis under which we may issue unsecured commercial paper notes (the “Commercial Paper Notes”) from time-to-time up to a maximum aggregate principal amount outstanding at any time of $750.0 million. The proceeds from the issuance of the Commercial Paper Notes are expected to be used for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of other debt of the Company. The 2018 Credit Agreement is available to repay the Commercial Paper Notes, if necessary. Aggregate borrowings outstanding under the 2018 Credit Agreement and the Commercial Paper Notes will not exceed the $1.5 billion current maximum amount available under the 2018 Credit Agreement. The Commercial Paper Notes will be sold at a discount from par, or alternatively, will be sold at par and bear interest at rates that will vary based upon market conditions at the time of issuance. The maturities of the Commercial Paper Notes will vary but may not exceed 397 days from the date of issue. The definitive documents relating to the commercial paper program contain customary representations, warranties, default and indemnification provisions. There were no Commercial Paper Notes outstanding at March 31, 2023.When constructing new facilities or making major enhancements to existing facilities, we may have the opportunity to enter into incentive agreements with local government agencies in order to reduce certain state and local tax expenditures. Under these agreements, we transfer the related assets to various local government entities and receive bonds. We immediately lease the facilities from the local government entities and have an option to repurchase the facilities for a nominal amount upon tendering the bonds to the local government entities at various predetermined dates. The bonds and the associated obligations for the leases of the facilities offset, and the underlying assets are recorded in property, plant and equipment. We currently have the ability to transfer up to $540 million in assets under these arrangements, however, at March 31, 2023, there are no amounts outstanding under these arrangements.The non-current portion of our long-term debt amounted to $3.2 billion at March 31, 2023, compared to $3.2 billion at December 31, 2022. In addition, at March 31, 2023, we had availability to borrow $1.5 billion under our commercial paper program and the 2018 Credit Agreement, and $180.5 million under other existing lines of credit, subject to the financial covenant under the 2018 Credit Agreement. We have the ability and intent to refinance our borrowings under our other existing lines of credit with borrowings under the 2018 Credit Agreement, as applicable. Therefore, the amounts outstanding under those lines of credit, if any, are classified as long-term debt. We believe that at March 31, 2023 we were, and that we currently are, in compliance with all of our long-term debt covenants.
In the ordinary course of business with customers, vendors and others, we have entered into off-balance sheet arrangements, including bank guarantees and letters of credit, which totaled approximately $146.2 million at March 31, 2023. None of these off-balance sheet arrangements has had, or is likely to have, a material effect on our current or future financial condition, results of operations, liquidity or capital resources.
Our contractual obligations have not significantly changed, based on our ordinary business activities and projected capital expenditures noted above, from the information we provided in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.Total expected 2023 contributions to our domestic and foreign qualified and nonqualified pension plans, including the Albemarle Corporation Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan, are expected to approximate $15 million. We may choose to make additional pension contributions in excess of this amount. We have made contributions of $2.7 million to our domestic and foreign pension plans (both qualified and nonqualified) during the three-month period ended March 31, 2023.The liability related to uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties, recorded in Other noncurrent liabilities totaled $126.4 million at March 31, 2023 and $83.7 million at December 31, 2022. Related assets for corresponding offsetting benefits recorded in Other assets totaled $32.6 million at March 31, 2023 and $32.4 million at December 31, 2022. We cannot estimate the amounts of any cash payments associated with these liabilities for the remainder of 2023 or the next twelve months, and we are unable to estimate the timing of any such cash payments in the future at this time. We are subject to federal, state, local and foreign requirements regulating the handling, manufacture and use of materials (some of which may be classified as hazardous or toxic by one or more regulatory agencies), the discharge of materials into the environment and the protection of the environment. To our knowledge, we are currently complying, and expect to continue to comply, in all material respects with applicable environmental laws, regulations, statutes and ordinances. Compliance with existing federal, state, local and foreign environmental protection laws is not expected to have a material effect on capital expenditures, earnings or our competitive position, but the costs associated with increased legal or regulatory requirements could have an adverse effect on our operating results.Among other environmental requirements, we are subject to the federal Superfund law, and similar state laws, under which we may be designated as a potentially responsible party (“PRP”), and may be liable for a share of the costs associated with cleaning up various hazardous waste sites. Management believes that in cases in which we may have liability as a PRP, our liability for our share of cleanup is de minimis. Further, almost all such sites represent environmental issues that are quite mature and have been investigated, studied and in many cases settled. In de minimis situations, our policy generally is to negotiate a consent decree and to pay any apportioned settlement, enabling us to be effectively relieved of any further liability as a PRP, except for remote contingencies. In other than de minimis PRP matters, our records indicate that unresolved PRP exposures should be immaterial. We accrue and expense our proportionate share of PRP costs. Because management has been actively involved in evaluating environmental matters, we are able to conclude that the outstanding environmental liabilities for unresolved PRP sites should not have a material adverse effect upon our results of operations or financial condition.
We anticipate that cash on hand and cash provided by operating activities, divestitures and borrowings will be sufficient to pay our operating expenses, satisfy debt service obligations, fund any capital expenditures and share repurchases, make acquisitions, make pension contributions and pay dividends for the foreseeable future. Our main focus in the short-term, during the continued uncertainty surrounding the global economy, including caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and recent inflationary trends, is to continue to maintain financial flexibility by continuing our cost savings initiative, while still protecting our employees and customers, committing to shareholder returns and maintaining an investment grade rating. Over the next three years, in terms of uses of cash, we will continue to invest in growth of the businesses and return value to shareholders. Additionally, we will continue to evaluate the merits of any opportunities that may arise for acquisitions of businesses or assets, which may require additional liquidity. For example, we recently announced we submitted a non-binding proposal to acquire all outstanding shares of Liontown Resources, owner of a lithium resource in Western Australia, in cash. Financing the purchase price of such transaction or any other acquisitions could involve borrowing under existing or new credit facilities and/or the issuance of debt or equity securities, in addition to cash on hand.Our growth investments include the recently completed acquisition all of the outstanding equity of Qinzhou for approximately $200 million in cash. Qinzhou's operations include a recently constructed lithium processing plant that has designed annual conversion capacity of up to 25,000 metric tons of LCE and is capable of producing battery-grade lithium carbonate and lithium hydroxide. In addition, we announced agreements for a strategic investment in China with plans to build a battery grade lithium conversion plant in Meishan initially targeting 50,000 metric tonnes of LCE per year. Construction of the Meishan facility is currently underway and is expected to be completed in 2024. We also announced the decision to build two additional processing trains at the Kemerton lithium hydroxide plant in Western Australia. The additional trains would increase the facility’s production by 50,000 metric tonnes per year.In October 2022, we announced we had been awarded a nearly $150 million grant from the U.S. Department of Energy to expand domestic manufacturing of batteries for EVs and the electrical grid and for materials and components currently imported from other countries. The grant funding is intended to support a portion of the anticipated cost to construct a new, commercial-scale U.S.-based lithium concentrator facility at our Kings Mountain, North Carolina, location. We expect the concentrator facility to create hundreds of construction and full-time jobs, and to supply up to 350,000 metric tonnes per year of spodumene concentrate to our previously announced mega-flex lithium conversion facility.In addition, we recently announced plans to construct a new $1.3 billion lithium mega-flex processing facility in South Carolina capable of annually producing approximately 50,000 metric tonnes of battery-grade lithium hydroxide, with the potential to expand up to 100,000 metric tonnes. Construction is expected to begin in late 2024. In December 2022, we also acquired a location in Charlotte, North Carolina, where we intend to invest at least $180 million to establish the Albemarle Technology Park, a world-class facility designed for novel materials research, advanced process development, and acceleration of next-generation lithium products to market. We anticipate that innovations from the new site will enhance lithium recovery, improve production methods, and introduce new forms of lithium to enable breakthrough levels of battery performance. In addition, we anticipate the creation of at least 200 jobs at the site.Our cash flows from operations may be negatively affected by adverse consequences to our customers and the markets in which we compete as a result of moderating global economic conditions, continuing inflationary trends and reduced capital availability. We have experienced, and may continue to experience, volatility and increases in the price of certain raw materials and in transportation and energy costs as a result of global market and supply chain disruptions and the broader inflationary environment. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material impact on our liquidity to date; however, we cannot predict the overall impact in terms of cash flow generation as that will depend on the length and severity of the outbreak and any future pandemics and its and their impact. As a result, we are planning for various economic scenarios and actively monitoring our balance sheet to maintain the financial flexibility needed.Although we maintain business relationships with a diverse group of financial institutions as sources of financing, an adverse change in their credit standing could lead them to not honor their contractual credit commitments to us, decline funding under our existing but uncommitted lines of credit with them, not renew their extensions of credit or not provide new financing to us. While the global corporate bond and bank loan markets remain strong, periods of elevated uncertainty related to the stability of the banking system, the COVID-19 pandemic or future pandemic or global economic and/or geopolitical concerns may limit efficient access to such markets for extended periods of time. If such concerns heighten, we may incur increased borrowing costs and reduced credit capacity as our various credit facilities mature. If the U.S. Federal Reserve or similar national reserve banks in other countries decide to continue tightening the monetary supply, we may incur increased borrowing costs (as interest rates increase on our variable rate credit facilities, as our various credit facilities mature or as we refinance any maturing fixed rate debt obligations), although these cost increases would be partially offset by increased income rates on portions of our cash deposits.As first reported in 2018, following receipt of information regarding potential improper payments being made by third-party sales representatives of our Refining Solutions business, within our Ketjen segment, we promptly retained outside counsel and forensic accountants to investigate potential violations of the Company’s Code of Conduct, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, and other potentially applicable laws. Based on this internal investigation, we have voluntarily self-reported potential issues relating to the use of third-party sales representatives in our Refining Solutions business, within our Ketjen segment, to the U.S. Department of Justice (“DOJ”), the SEC, and the Dutch Public Prosecutor (“DPP”), and are cooperating with the DOJ, the SEC, and the DPP in their review of these matters. In connection with our internal investigation, we have implemented, and are continuing to implement, appropriate remedial measures. We have commenced discussions with the SEC, DOJ and DPP about a potential resolution of these matters.At this time, we are unable to predict the duration, scope, result, or related costs associated with the investigations. We also are unable to predict what action may be taken by the DOJ, the SEC, or the DPP, or what penalties or remedial actions they may ultimately seek. Any determination that our operations or activities are not, or were not, in compliance with existing laws or regulations could result in the imposition of fines, penalties, disgorgement, equitable relief, or other losses. We do not believe, however, that any such fines, penalties, disgorgement, equitable relief, or other losses would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or liquidity. However, an adverse resolution could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations in a particular period.Overall, with generally strong cash-generative businesses and no significant long-term debt maturities before 2025, we believe we have, and will be able to maintain, a solid liquidity position.We had cash and cash equivalents totaling $1.6 billion at March 31, 2023, of which $1.2 billion is held by our foreign subsidiaries. This cash represents an important source of our liquidity and is invested in bank accounts or money market investments with no limitations on access. The cash held by our foreign subsidiaries is intended for use outside of the U.S. We anticipate that any needs for liquidity within the U.S. in excess of our cash held in the U.S. can be readily satisfied with borrowings under our existing U.S. credit facilities or our commercial paper program.
Albemarle Wodgina Pty Ltd (the “Issuer”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Albemarle Corporation, issued $300.0 million aggregate principal amount of 3.45% Senior Notes due 2029 (the “3.45% Senior Notes”) in November 2019. The 3.45% Senior Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed (the “Guarantee”) on a senior unsecured basis by Albemarle Corporation (the “Parent Guarantor”). No direct or indirect subsidiaries of the Parent Guarantor guarantee the 3.45% Senior Notes (such subsidiaries are referred to as the “Non-Guarantors”).In 2019, we completed the acquisition of a 60% interest in MRL’s Wodgina hard rock lithium mine project (“Wodgina Project”) in Western Australia and formed an unincorporated joint venture with MRL, named MARBL Lithium Joint Venture, for the exploration, development, mining, processing and production of lithium and other minerals (other than iron ore and tantalum) from the Wodgina spodumene mine and for the operation of the Kemerton assets in Western Australia. We participate in the Wodgina Project through our ownership interest in the Issuer. The Parent Guarantor conducts its U.S. Specialties and Ketjen operations directly, and conducts its other operations (other than operations conducted through the Issuer) through the Non-Guarantors.The 3.45% Senior Notes are the Issuer’s senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment to the senior indebtedness of the Issuer, effectively subordinated to all of the secured indebtedness of the Issuer, to the extent of the value of the assets securing that indebtedness, and structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities of its subsidiaries. The Guarantee is the senior unsecured obligation of the Parent Guarantor and ranks equally in right of payment to the senior indebtedness of the Parent Guarantor, effectively subordinated to the secured debt of the Parent Guarantor to the extent of the value of the assets securing the indebtedness and structurally subordinated to all indebtedness and other liabilities of its subsidiaries.For cash management purposes, the Parent Guarantor transfers cash among itself, the Issuer and the Non-Guarantors through intercompany financing arrangements, contributions or declaration of dividends between the respective parent and its subsidiaries. The transfer of cash under these activities facilitates the ability of the recipient to make specified third-party payments for principal and interest on the Issuer and/or the Parent Guarantor’s outstanding debt, common stock dividends and common stock repurchases. There are no significant restrictions on the ability of the Issuer or the Parent Guarantor to obtain funds from subsidiaries by dividend or loan.The following tables present summarized financial information for the Parent Guarantor and the Issuer on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Issuer and the Parent Guarantor and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiary that is a Non-Guarantor. Each entity in the combined financial information follows the same accounting policies as described herein and in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
(a)    Includes net sales to Non-Guarantors of $435.1 million and $2.2 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and year ended December 31, 2022, respectively.(b)    Includes intergroup expenses to Non-Guarantors of $36.8 million and $134.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and year ended December 31, 2022, respectively.
(a)    Includes receivables from Non-Guarantors of $484.1 million and $605.3 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.(b)    Includes noncurrent receivables from Non-Guarantors of $9.1 million and $109.3 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.(c)    Includes current payables to Non-Guarantors of $1.5 billion and $1.6 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.(d)    Includes noncurrent payables to Non-Guarantors of $6.6 billion and $6.6 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.    The 3.45% Senior Notes are structurally subordinated to the indebtedness and other liabilities of the Non-Guarantors. The Non-Guarantors are separate and distinct legal entities and have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay any amounts due pursuant to the 3.45% Senior Notes or the Indenture under which the 3.45% Senior Notes were issued, or to make any funds available therefor, whether by dividends, loans, distributions or other payments. Any right that the Parent Guarantor has to receive any assets of any of the Non-Guarantors upon the liquidation or reorganization of any Non-Guarantor, and the consequent rights of holders of the 3.45% Senior Notes to realize proceeds from the sale of any of a Non-Guarantor’s assets, would be effectively subordinated to the claims of such Non-Guarantor’s creditors, including trade creditors and holders of preferred equity interests, if any, of such Non-Guarantor. Accordingly, in the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of the Non-Guarantors, the Non-Guarantors will pay the holders of their debts, holders of preferred equity interests, if any, and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their assets to the Parent Guarantor. The 3.45% Senior Notes are obligations of the Issuer. The Issuer’s cash flow and ability to make payments on the 3.45% Senior Notes could be dependent upon the earnings it derives from the production from MARBL for the Wodgina Project. Absent income received from sales of its share of production from MARBL, the Issuer’s ability to service the 3.45% Senior Notes could be dependent upon the earnings of the Parent Guarantor’s subsidiaries and other joint ventures and the payment of those earnings to the Issuer in the form of equity, loans or advances and through repayment of loans or advances from the Issuer.The Issuer’s obligations in respect of MARBL are guaranteed by the Parent Guarantor. Further, under MARBL pursuant to a deed of cross security between the Issuer, the joint venture partner and the manager of the project (the “Manager”), each of the Issuer, and the joint venture partner have granted security to each other and the Manager for the obligations each of the Issuer and the joint venture partner have to each other and to the Manager. The claims of the joint venture partner, the Manager and other secured creditors of the Issuer will have priority as to the assets of the Issuer over the claims of holders of the 3.45% Senior Notes.
In March 2021, Albemarle New Holding GmbH (the “Subsidiary Guarantor”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Albemarle Corporation, added a full and unconditional guarantee (the “Upstream Guarantee”) to all securities of Albemarle Corporation (the “Parent Issuer”) issued and outstanding as of such date and, subject to the terms of the applicable amendment or supplement, securities issuable by the Parent Issuer pursuant to the Indenture, dated as of January 20, 2005, as amended and supplemented from time to time (the “Indenture”). No other direct or indirect subsidiaries of the Parent Issuer guarantee these securities (such subsidiaries are referred to as the “Upstream Non-Guarantors”). See Long-term debt section above for a description of the securities issued by the Parent Issuer.The current securities outstanding under the Indenture are the Parent Issuer’s unsecured and unsubordinated obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness of the Parent Issuer. All securities currently outstanding under the Indenture are effectively subordinated to the Parent Issuer’s existing and future secured indebtedness to the extent of the value of the assets securing that indebtedness. With respect to any series of securities issued under the Indenture that is subject to the Upstream Guarantee (which series of securities does not include the 2022 Notes), the Upstream Guarantee is, and will be, an unsecured and unsubordinated obligation of the Subsidiary Guarantor, ranking pari passu with all other existing and future unsubordinated and unsecured indebtedness of the Subsidiary Guarantor. All securities currently outstanding under the Indenture (other than the 2022 Notes) are effectively subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities of the Parent’s Subsidiaries other than the Subsidiary Guarantor. The 2022 Notes are effectively subordinated to all existing and future indebtedness and other liabilities of the Parent’s Subsidiaries, including the Subsidiary Guarantor.For cash management purposes, the Parent Issuer transfers cash among itself, the Subsidiary Guarantor and the Upstream Non-Guarantors through intercompany financing arrangements, contributions or declaration of dividends between the respective parent and its subsidiaries. The transfer of cash under these activities facilitates the ability of the recipient to make specified third-party payments for principal and interest on the Parent Issuer and/or the Subsidiary Guarantor’s outstanding debt, common stock dividends and common stock repurchases. There are no significant restrictions on the ability of the Parent Issuer or the Subsidiary Guarantor to obtain funds from subsidiaries by dividend or loan.The following tables present summarized financial information for the Subsidiary Guarantor and the Parent Issuer on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Parent Issuer and the Subsidiary Guarantor and (ii) equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiary that is an Upstream Non-Guarantor. Each entity in the combined financial information follows the same accounting policies as described herein and in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
(a)    Includes net sales to Non-Guarantors of $116.6 million and $1.8 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and year ended December 31, 2022, respectively.(b)    Includes intergroup expenses to Non-Guarantors of $34.7 million and $25.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and year ended December 31, 2022, respectively.
(a)    Includes receivables from Non-Guarantors of $352.8 million and $644.0 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.(b)    Includes noncurrent receivables from Non-Guarantors of $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.(c)    Includes current payables to Non-Guarantors of $1.5 billion and $1.6 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.(d)    Includes noncurrent payables to Non-Guarantors of $5.8 billion and $5.8 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.These securities are structurally subordinated to the indebtedness and other liabilities of the Upstream Non-Guarantors. The Upstream Non-Guarantors are separate and distinct legal entities and have no obligation, contingent or otherwise, to pay any amounts due pursuant to these securities or the Indenture under which these securities were issued, or to make any funds available therefor, whether by dividends, loans, distributions or other payments. Any right that the Subsidiary Guarantor has to receive any assets of any of the Upstream Non-Guarantors upon the liquidation or reorganization of any Upstream Non-Guarantors, and the consequent rights of holders of these securities to realize proceeds from the sale of any of an Upstream Non-Guarantor’s assets, would be effectively subordinated to the claims of such Upstream Non-Guarantor’s creditors, including trade creditors and holders of preferred equity interests, if any, of such Upstream Non-Guarantor. Accordingly, in the event of a bankruptcy, liquidation or reorganization of any of the Upstream Non-Guarantors, the Upstream Non-Guarantors will pay the holders of their debts, holders of preferred equity interests, if any, and their trade creditors before they will be able to distribute any of their assets to the Subsidiary Guarantor.
There have been no significant changes in our critical accounting policies and estimates from the information we provided in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.