
Our business strategic priorities remain focused on four principal pillars for growth: (i) international expansion; (ii) general practitioner dentists (“GPs”) adoption; (iii) patient demand and conversion; and (iv) orthodontic utilization. Our growth strategy depends on our ability to facilitate the digital transformation of dentistry happening around the world, our continuous focus on innovation, and expansion to meet and exceed evolving customer expectations as the array of products and services available to them increases. Below is a discussion of the significant trends and uncertainties that could impact our operations:
Our revenues are susceptible to fluctuations in macroeconomic conditions, in line with inflation, rising interest rates, threats of or actual recessions, fluctuations in currency exchange rates, supply chain challenges, market volatility, actual and threatened wars and military actions, and other factors, each of which impact customer confidence, consumer sentiment and demand. Many of these same factors also impact our costs and those of our suppliers through higher raw material prices, transportation costs, labor costs, supply and distribution operations. Additionally, many of our international operations are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar which were impacted in 2022 by macroeconomic slowing or contraction causing weakening against the U.S. dollar, which negatively impacted our financial condition and results of operations. In the first quarter of 2023, the U.S. dollar weakened against a number of these other currencies, favorably impacting our financial condition and results of operations. We expect this moderation of the strength of the dollar to continue, although we also expect the dollar to remain historically strong compared to many of these currencies. The nature and extent of the impact of these factors varies by time and region and remains uncertain and unpredictable.The military conflict between Russia and Ukraine increased the unpredictability of the volatile macroeconomic conditions in 2022 and is likely to continue doing so in 2023. While we continue to employ research and development personnel in Russia as well as limited post-sales support and administrative personnel, our total number of employees in Russia was materially reduced in 2022 following actions and initiatives designed to align the size of our operations with our ongoing resource needs. We do not anticipate the military conflict between Russia and Ukraine to materially impact our 2023 financial condition and results of operations although we expect the conflict will continue to create market uncertainties and dampen consumer sentiment and demand, particularly in Europe.
Although there remains significant uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic for regional economies, its global impact continues to decline. During 2022, we experienced the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic primarily in the Asia Pacific region, particularly in China, where lockdowns decreased economic activity throughout most of the year. With the easing of the COVID-19 restrictions in China in late 2022 and early 2023, rates of infection in China increased early in the first quarter of 2023 and decreased as the quarter progressed. We expect the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to remain unpredictable in 2023, although we expect them to decrease compared to 2022. Nevertheless, comparing our financial results for the reporting periods of 2023 to the same reporting periods of 2022 or earlier may not be a useful means by which to evaluate our business and results of operations due to volatility in regional business environments caused by the pandemic.
As the markets for clear aligners and digital processes and workflows used to transform the practice of dentistry continue to mature, we anticipate customer and patient expectations and demands will evolve and competition to supplant traditional bracket and wires to increase. We expect to succeed in these evolving markets by continuing to meet customer demands with innovative treatment options that include more choices to address a wider scope of treatment goals and budgets based on our existing and new products. Our efforts to succeed with these innovative treatment options may result in larger and unpredictable variations in geographic and product mix and selling prices, causing uncertainty, including variations in products sold, changes in the amount and timing of deferred revenues and other potential impacts on our financial statements and business operations.We strive to manage the challenges from the macroeconomic conditions, the conflict in Ukraine, COVID-19 and the evolution of our target markets by focusing on improving our operations, building flexibility and efficiencies in our processes, adjusting our business models to changing circumstances and offering products that meet market demand. Specifically, we are managing cost impacts through pricing actions, cost saving measures that drive value and maintaining control of our employee headcount. We also continue to innovate, introducing new and enhanced products that augment our doctor customer and patient experiences.  Further discussion of the impact of these challenges on our business may be found in Part II, Item 1A of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q under the heading “Risk Factors.”
We measure our performance against these strategic priorities by the achievement of key financial and operating metrics. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our business operations reflect the following: •Revenues of $943.1 million, a decrease of 3.1% year-over-year;•Clear Aligner revenues of $789.8 million, a decrease of 2.5% year-over-year; ◦Americas Clear Aligner revenues of $361.3 million, a decrease of 4.0% year-over-year;◦International Clear Aligner revenues of $354.2 million, a decrease of 4.5% year-over-year;◦Clear Aligner case volume decrease of 3.9% year-over-year and Clear Aligner case volume increase for teenage patients of 3.8% year-over-year;•Imaging Systems and CAD/CAM Services revenues of $153.3 million, a decrease of 6.2% year-over-year;•Income from operations of $133.5 million and operating margin of 14.2%;•Effective tax rate of 34.8%;•Net income of $87.8 million with diluted net income per share of $1.14;•Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $921.4 million as of March 31, 2023;•Operating cash flow of $199.9 million;•Capital expenditures of $64.1 million, predominantly related to increases in our manufacturing capacity and facilities; and•Number of employees was 23,035 as of March 31, 2023, a decrease of 2.5% year-over-year.
•As of March 31, 2023, approximately 15.1 million people worldwide have been treated with our Invisalign system. Management measures these results by comparing to the millions of people who can benefit from straighter teeth and uses this data to target opportunities to expand the market for orthodontics by educating consumers about the benefits of straighter teeth using the Invisalign system. •For the first quarter of 2023, total Invisalign cases submitted with a digital scanner in the Americas increased to 93.1%, up from 90.6% in the first quarter of 2022 and international scans increased to 87.0%, up from 82.8% in the first quarter of 2022. For the first quarter of 2023, 97.7% of Invisalign cases submitted by North American orthodontists were submitted digitally. •The total utilization rate in the first quarter of 2023 decreased to 7.0 cases per doctor compared to 7.3 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2022. Utilization rates in North America and our International locations were as follows:▪North America: The utilization rate among our North American orthodontist customers decreased to 26.2 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 26.8 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2022 and the utilization rate among our North American GP customers decreased to 4.9 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 5.0 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2022. ▪International: International doctor utilization rate was 6.2 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 6.4 cases per doctor in the first quarter of 2022.
* Invisalign utilization rates are calculated by the number of cases shipped divided by the number of doctors to whom cases were shipped. Our International region includes Europe, Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”) and Asia Pacific (“APAC”). Latin America (“LATAM”) is excluded from the International region based on its immateriality to the quarter; however is included in the Total utilization.
We group our operations into two reportable segments: Clear Aligner segment and Systems and Services segment. •Our Clear Aligner segment consists of Comprehensive Products, Non-Comprehensive Products and Non-Case revenues as defined below:▪Comprehensive Products include, but are not limited to, Invisalign Comprehensive and Invisalign First.▪Non-Comprehensive Products include, but are not limited to, Invisalign Moderate, Lite and Express packages and Invisalign Go and Invisalign Go Plus.▪Non-Case products include, but are not limited to, retention products, Invisalign training, adjusting tools used by dental professionals during the course of treatment and Invisalign Accessory Products that are complementary to our doctor-prescribed principal products such as aligner cases (clamshells), teeth whitening products, cleaning solutions (crystals, foam and other material) and other oral health products available in certain commerce channels in select markets. We also offer in the U.S. and Canada, a Doctor Subscription Program which is a monthly subscription program based on the doctor’s monthly need for retention or limited treatment. The program allows doctors the flexibility to order both “touch-up” or retention aligners within their subscribed tier and is designed for a segment of experienced Invisalign trained doctors who are currently not regularly using our retainers or low-stage aligners.•Our Systems and Services segment consists of our iTero intraoral scanning systems, which includes a single hardware platform and restorative or orthodontic software options. Our services include subscription software, disposables, rentals, leases, pay per scan services, as well as exocad’s CAD/CAM software solutions that integrate workflows to dental labs and dental practices. Net revenues for our Clear Aligner and Systems and Services segments by region for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are as follows (in millions):
Case volume data which represents Clear Aligner case shipments for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 is as follows (in thousands):  Three Months EndedMarch 31,20232022ChangeTotal case volume575.3 598.8 (23.6)(3.9)%
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, total net revenues decreased $30.1 million as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to a decrease in both Clear Aligner case volumes and scanner volumes and unfavorable foreign exchange rates, partially offset by increases in service revenues and Clear Aligner non-case revenues.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, Americas net revenues decreased by $15.0 million as compared to the same period in 2022 due to a 5.3% decrease in case volumes, which reduced net revenues by $20.0 million, partially offset by an increase in ASP which increased net revenues by $5.0 million. Higher ASP was mainly due to price increases on most products which increased revenues by $19.3 million along with higher additional aligners which increased net revenues by $5.0 million. The increases in ASP were partially offset by unfavorable promotional discounts which decreased net revenues by $15.8 million and a product mix shift to lower priced products which decreased net revenues by $2.6 million.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, International net revenues decreased by $16.9 million as compared to the same period in 2022, due to a 2.3% decrease in case volumes, which decreased net revenues by $8.4 million, and lower ASP which decreased net revenues by $8.5 million. Lower ASP was largely due to a product mix shift to lower priced products which decreased net revenues by $33.1 million, unfavorable foreign exchange rates which resulted in lower net revenues of $26.4 million, and unfavorable promotional discounts which decreased net revenues $6.0 million. The decrease in ASP was partially offset by higher additional aligners which increased net revenues by $30.9 million and price increases on most products which increased net revenues by $24.4 million.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, non-case net revenues increased by $12.0 million as compared to the same period in 2022 mainly due to increased volumes from the Doctor Subscription program and retention products across all regions primarily driven by Vivera retainers.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, Systems and Services net revenues decreased by $10.2 million as compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to by a lower number of scanners sold which decreased net revenues by $27.3 million. The decrease in net revenue due to lower scanner volume was partially offset by higher service and other revenues which increased net revenues by $15.2 million mostly due to a larger scanner installed base and higher scanner ASP which increased net revenues $1.9 million.
Cost of net revenues includes personnel-related costs including payroll and stock-based compensation for staff involved in the production process, the cost of materials, packaging, freight and shipping related costs, depreciation on capital equipment and facilities used in the production process, amortization of acquired intangible assets and training costs.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our gross margin percentage decreased as compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to increased manufacturing spend as we continue to ramp our new manufacturing facility in Poland in addition to higher mix of additional aligners.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our gross margin percentage decreased as compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to manufacturing inefficiencies from lower production volumes and higher inventory costs. These factors were partially offset by higher service revenues and higher ASP.
Selling, general and administrative expense generally includes personnel-related costs, including payroll, stock-based compensation and commissions for our sales force, marketing and advertising expenses including media, clinical education, marketing materials, trade shows and industry events, legal and outside service costs, equipment, software and maintenance costs, depreciation and amortization expense and allocations of corporate overhead expenses including facilities and Information Technology (“IT”).For the three months ended March 31, 2023, selling, general and administrative expense remained flat compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to higher salaries expense, fringe benefits and stock-based and incentive compensation, offset by lower advertising and marketing costs and outside service costs.
Research and development expense generally includes personnel-related costs, including payroll and stock-based compensation, outside service costs associated with the research and development of new products and enhancements to existing products, software, equipment, material and maintenance costs, depreciation and amortization expense and allocations of corporate overhead expenses including facilities and IT.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, research and development expense increased compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to higher salaries expense, fringe benefits and stock-based and incentive compensation as we continue to focus on our investments in innovation and research.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our operating margin percentage decreased compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to lower gross margin.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our operating margin percentage decreased compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to higher operating expenses as a percentage of net revenues as well as lower gross margin.
Interest income generally includes interest earned on cash, cash equivalents and investment balances. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, interest income increased compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to higher interest rates in the first quarter of 2023.
Other income (expense), net, generally includes foreign exchange gains and losses, gains and losses on foreign currency forward contracts, interest expense, gains and losses on equity investments and other miscellaneous charges. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, other income (expense), net increased compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to the favorable impact of foreign exchange rates and higher interest rates.
Our effective tax rate differs from the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% for both the three month periods ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 primarily due to the recognition of additional tax expense resulting from foreign income taxed at different rates, state income taxes, and non-deductible expenses in the U.S.The increase in our effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022 is primarily attributable to the decrease and change in our jurisdictional mix of income, foreign income taxed at different rates, and lower excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation.
As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we had the following cash and cash equivalents and short-term and long-term marketable securities (in thousands):
As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, approximately $610.9 million and $653.7 million, respectively, of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by our foreign subsidiaries. We intend to continue reinvesting our foreign subsidiary earnings indefinitely and expect the additional costs upon repatriation of these foreign earnings not to be significant. We generate sufficient domestic operating cash flow and have access to external funding under our $300.0 million revolving line of credit. We believe that our current cash balances and the borrowing capacity under our credit facility, if necessary, will be sufficient to fund our business for at least the next 12 months. The sanctions against Russian banks or international bank messaging systems due to the military conflict between Ukraine and Russia could impact our ability to access our cash in Russia but would not materially impact our liquidity position. As of March 31, 2023, cash and cash equivalents domiciled in Russia, which is required to fund their current operating requirements, represent approximately 2.2% of our total cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our material cash requirements are as follows:•For 2023, we expect our investments in capital expenditures to exceed $200.0 million. Capital expenditures primarily relate to building construction and improvements as well as additional manufacturing capacity to support our international expansion. This includes our investment in an aligner fabrication facility in Wroclaw, Poland which began serving doctors during the second quarter of 2022 as a part of our strategy to bring operational facilities closer to customers. As we continue growing, we intend to expand our investments in research and development, manufacturing, treatment planning, sales and marketing operations to meet actual and anticipated local and regional demands.•During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we entered into or completed ASRs providing for the repurchase of our common stock based on the volume-weighted average price during the term of the agreement, less an agreed upon discount. As of March 31, 2023, the May 2021 Repurchase Program was completed. In January 2023, our Board of Directors authorized a plan to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our common stock (“January 2023 Repurchase Program”), none of which had been utilized as of March 31, 2023. Refer to Note 9 “Common Stock Repurchase Program” of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for details on our stock repurchase programs. •There have been no material changes to our purchase commitments for goods and services and future operating lease payments during the periods covered by this 10-Q outside the normal course of business compared to the disclosures in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
The following table summarizes our condensed consolidated cash flows for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 (in thousands):
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, cash flows from operations of $199.9 million resulted primarily from our net income of approximately $87.8 million as well as the following:
•Stock-based compensation of $37.7 million related to equity awards granted to employees and directors;•Depreciation and amortization of $35.8 million related to our investments in property, plant and equipment and intangible assets; •Deferred taxes of $18.4 million related to increase in long term deferred tax position; and•Non-cash operating lease costs of $7.8 million related majority to amortization of deferred commissions.
•Increase of $37.4 million in accrued and other long-term liabilities primarily due to higher incentive accruals for 2023, as well as timing of payment of other activities;•Decrease of $32.7 million in accounts receivable due to timing of collections and offset by an increased sales volumes;•Increase of $27.7 million in deferred revenues due to the deferral of revenue on shipments over the period as well as timing of revenue recognition; and•Increase of $24.0 million in inventories primarily due our efforts to manage stock at appropriate levels as required.
Net cash used in investing activities was $52.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 which primarily consisted of purchases of property, plant and equipment of $64.1 million and purchases of marketable securities of $2.4 million, partially offset by sales and maturities of our marketable securities of $13.7 million.
Net cash used in financing activities was $259.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 which consisted of common stock repurchases of $252.4 million and payroll taxes paid for equity awards through share withholdings of $20.9 million which were partially offset by $14.3 million of proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our employee stock purchase plan.
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses and disclosures at the date of the financial statements. We evaluate our estimates on an on-going basis, including those related to revenue recognition, goodwill and finite-lived acquired intangible assets, income taxes, legal proceedings and litigations. We use authoritative pronouncements, historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for making the estimates. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Our revenues are derived primarily from the sale of aligners, scanners, and services from our Clear Aligner and Systems and Services segments. We enter into sales contracts that may consist of multiple distinct performance obligations where certain performance obligations of the sales contract are not delivered in one reporting period. We measure and allocate revenues according to ASC 606-10, “Revenues from Contracts with Customers.”Determining the standalone selling price (“SSP”) in order to allocate consideration from the contract to the individual performance obligations is the result of various factors, such as changing trends and market conditions, historical prices, costs, and gross margins. While changes in the allocation of the SSP between performance obligations will not affect the amount of total revenues recognized for a particular contract, any material changes could impact the timing of revenue recognition, which would have a material effect on our financial position and result of operations. This is because the contract consideration is allocated to each performance obligation, delivered or undelivered, at the inception of the contract based on the SSP of each distinct performance obligation.We allocate revenues for each clear aligner treatment plan based on each unit’s SSP. Management considers a variety of factors such as same or similar product historical sales, costs, and gross margin, which may vary over time depending upon the unique facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation in making these estimates. In addition to historical data, we take into consideration changing trends and market conditions. For treatment plans with multiple options, we also consider usage rates, which is the number of times a customer is expected to order more aligners after the initial shipment. Our process for estimating usage rates requires significant judgment and evaluation of inputs, including historical usage data by region, country and channel.We estimate the SSP of each element in a scanner system and services sale taking into consideration same or similar product historical prices as well as our discounting strategies.