
American Water is the largest and most geographically diverse, publicly traded water and wastewater utility company in the United States, as measured by both operating revenues and population served. The Company’s primary business involves the ownership of utilities that provide water and wastewater services to residential, commercial, industrial, public authority, fire service and sale for resale customers, collectively presented as the “Regulated Businesses.” Services provided by the Company’s utilities are subject to regulation by multiple state utility commissions or other entities engaged in utility regulation, collectively referred to as public utility commissions (“PUCs”). The Company also operates other businesses not subject to economic regulation by state PUCs that provide water and wastewater services to the U.S. government on military installations, as well as municipalities, collectively presented throughout this Form 10-Q within “Other.” See Part I, Item 1—Business in the Company’s Form 10-K for additional information.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, diluted earnings per share, prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”), were $0.91, an increase of $0.04, as compared to the same period in the prior year. This increase was primarily driven by the implementation of new rates in the Regulated Businesses for the recovery of capital and acquisition investments, offset somewhat by impacts from inflationary pressures on production costs and higher interest costs.
The Company continues to grow its businesses, with the majority of its growth to be achieved in the Regulated Businesses through (i) continued capital investment in the Company’s infrastructure to provide safe, clean, reliable and affordable water and wastewater services to its customers, and (ii) regulated acquisitions to expand the Company’s services to new customers. The Company plans to invest approximately $2.9 billion across its footprint in 2023. During the first three months of 2023, the Company invested $538 million, primarily in the Regulated Businesses, as discussed below:
•$532 million capital investment in the Regulated Businesses, the substantial majority for infrastructure improvements and replacements; and•$3 million to fund acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses, which added approximately 1,400 customers, in addition to approximately 4,000 customers added through organic growth.Effective March 24, 2023, the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary acquired the rights to buy the wastewater system assets of the Township of Towamencin, for an aggregate purchase price of $104 million, subject to adjustment as provided in the asset purchase agreement. This system provides wastewater services to approximately 6,300 customer connections in seven townships in Montgomery County, Pennsylvania. The Company expects to close this acquisition by mid-year 2024, pending regulatory approval. On October 11, 2022, the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary entered into an agreement to acquire the wastewater assets of the Butler Area Sewer Authority for a total purchase price of $232 million in cash, subject to adjustment as provided for in the asset purchase agreement. This system provides wastewater service for approximately 14,700 customer connections. The Company expects to close this acquisition by the end of 2023, pending regulatory approval.On March 29, 2021, the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary entered into an agreement to acquire the water and wastewater assets of Egg Harbor City for $22 million. The water and wastewater systems currently serve approximately 1,500 customers each, or 3,000 combined, and are being sold through the New Jersey Water Infrastructure Protection Act process. The Company expects to close this acquisition in 2023.As of March 31, 2023, the Company has entered into 27 agreements for pending acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses, including the agreements discussed above, to add approximately 48,200 additional customers.On April 6, 2023, the Company’s Illinois subsidiary entered into an agreement to acquire the assets of the wastewater treatment plant from the City of Granite City for $83 million, subject to adjustment as provided for in the asset purchase agreement. This system provides wastewater service for approximately 26,000 customer connections. The Company expects to close this acquisition by the end of 2023 or early 2024, pending regulatory approval.
On March 14, 2023, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) announced the proposed National Primary Drinking Water Regulation (“NPDWR”) for six per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (“PFAS”) including perfluorooctanoic acid (“PFOA”), perfluorooctane sulfonic acid (“PFOS”), perfluorononanoic acid (“PFNA”), hexafluoropropylene oxide dimer acid (“HFPO-DA”, commonly known as “GenX Chemicals”), perfluorohexane sulfonic acid (“PFHxS”), and perfluorobutane sulfonic acid (“PFBS”). The proposed regulations would establish legally enforceable levels for PFAS in drinking water. While the Company has been anticipating the rulemaking, the Company is carefully reviewing the NPDWR to assess the four parts per trillion requirements for PFAS and the application of the Hazard Index approach for PFNA, PFBS, PFHxS, and GenX Chemicals. The Company’s review will inform the comments on the proposed rulemaking it plans to submit to the EPA by May 30, 2023.The Company is evaluating the estimated capital expenditures for additional treatment over the next three to five years, including additional estimated operating expenses. The Company supports sound policies that will ensure compliance by all water utilities while protecting customers and communities from the costly burden of monitoring and mitigating PFAS. The Company continues to strongly advocate for policies that hold polluters accountable and is currently part of Multi-District Litigation against multiple PFAS manufacturers to ensure that the ultimate responsibility for the cleanup of these contaminants is attributed to the polluters.
The Company’s adjusted regulated operation and maintenance (“O&M”) efficiency ratio was 33.6% for the twelve months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to 33.9% for the twelve months ended March 31, 2022. The ratio reflects an increase in operating revenues for the Regulated Businesses, after considering the adjustment for the amortization of the excess accumulated deferred income taxes (“EADIT”) shown in the table below, as well as the continued focus on operating costs.The Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio is a non-GAAP measure and is defined by the Company as its operation and maintenance expenses from the Regulated Businesses, divided by the operating revenues from the Regulated Businesses, where both operation and maintenance expenses and operating revenues were adjusted to eliminate purchased water expense. Operating revenues were further adjusted to exclude reductions for the amortization of the EADIT. Also excluded from operation and maintenance expenses is the allocable portion of non-O&M support services costs, mainly depreciation and general taxes, which is reflected in the Regulated Businesses segment as operation and maintenance expenses, but for consolidated financial reporting purposes, is categorized within other line items in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations. The items discussed above were excluded from the O&M efficiency ratio calculation as they are not reflective of management’s ability to increase the efficiency of the Regulated Businesses.The Company evaluates its operating performance using this ratio, and believes it is useful to investors because it directly measures improvement in the operating performance and efficiency of the Regulated Businesses. This information is derived from the Company’s consolidated financial information but is not presented in its financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. This information supplements and should be read in conjunction with the Company’s GAAP disclosures, and should be considered as an addition to, and not a substitute for, any GAAP measure. The Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio (i) is not an accounting measure that is based on GAAP; (ii) is not based on a standard, objective industry definition or method of calculation; (iii) may not be comparable to other companies’ operating measures; and (iv) should not be used in place of the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this Form 10-Q.Presented in the table below is the calculation of the Company’s adjusted regulated O&M efficiency ratio and a reconciliation that compares operation and maintenance expenses and operating revenues, each as determined in accordance with GAAP, to those amounts utilized in the calculation of its adjusted O&M efficiency ratio:
(a)The calculation assumes regulated purchased water revenues approximate regulated purchased water expenses.
Presented in the table below are annualized incremental revenues, including reductions for the amortization of the EADIT that are generally offset in income tax expense, assuming a constant water sales volume and customer count, resulting from general rate case authorizations that became effective during 2023:
(a)Interim rates were effective May 1, 2022, and the difference between interim and final approved rates is subject to refund. The Virginia State Corporation Commission issued its final Order on April 24, 2023.On April 24, 2023, the Virginia State Corporation Commission issued an order approving the settlement of the rate case filed on September 26, 2022, by the Company’s Virginia subsidiary. The general rate case order approved an $11 million annualized increase in water and wastewater revenues. Interim rates in this proceeding were effective on May 1, 2022, and the order requires that the difference between interim and the final approved rates is subject to refund within 90 days of the order issuance. The order approves the settlement terms with a return on equity of 9.7% and a common equity ratio of 40.7%. The annualized revenue increase is driven primarily by significant incremental capital investments since the Virginia subsidiary’s 2020 rate case order that have been completed or are planned through April 30, 2023, increases in pension and other postretirement benefits expense and increases in production costs, including chemicals, fuel and power costs. The general rate case order includes recovery of the Company’s Virginia subsidiary’s COVID-19 deferral balance. It also includes approval of the accounting deferral of deviations in pension and other postretirement benefits expense from those established in base rates, until the Company’s Virginia subsidiary’s next base rate case.On December 8, 2022, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission issued an order approving the joint settlement of the rate case filed on April 29, 2022, by the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary. The general rate case order approved a $138 million annualized increase in water and wastewater revenues, excluding $24 million for previously approved infrastructure filings, and authorizes implementation of the new water and wastewater rates effective January 28, 2023. The rate case proceeding was resolved through a “black box” settlement agreement and did not specify an approved return on equity. The annualized revenue increase is driven primarily by significant incremental capital investments since the Pennsylvania subsidiary’s 2021 rate case order that will be completed through December 31, 2023, increases in pension and other postretirement benefits expense and increases in production costs, including chemicals, fuel and power costs. The general rate case order also includes recovery of the Company’s Pennsylvania subsidiary’s COVID-19 deferral balance.On December 15, 2022, the Illinois Commerce Commission issued an order approving the adjustment of base rates requested in a rate case filed on February 10, 2022, by the Company’s Illinois subsidiary. As updated in the Illinois subsidiary’s June 29, 2022 rebuttal filing, the request sought $83 million in additional annualized revenues, excluding previously recovered infrastructure surcharges. The general rate case order approved a $67 million annualized increase in water and wastewater system revenues, excluding previously recovered infrastructure surcharges of $18 million, effective January 1, 2023, based on an authorized return on equity of 9.8%, authorized rate base of $1.64 billion, a common equity ratio of 49.0% and a debt ratio of 51.0%. The annualized revenue increase is being driven primarily by significant water and wastewater system capital investments since the Illinois subsidiary’s 2017 rate case order that have been completed or are planned through December 31, 2023, expected higher pension and other postretirement benefit costs, and increases in production costs, including chemicals, fuel and power costs.
On March 31, 2023, the Company’s Indiana subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $87 million in additional annualized revenues, excluding $41 million of revenue from infrastructure filings already approved, which includes three step increases, with $43 million of the increase to be included in rates in January 2024, $18 million in May 2024, and $26 million in May 2025. The general rate case is expected to be completed by the end of January 2024.On July 1, 2022, the Company’s Missouri subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting an increase of $105 million in additional annualized revenues, excluding infrastructure surcharges at the time of filing of approximately $40 million. Subsequent to the filing of the general rate case, the Company’s Missouri subsidiary filed its semi-annual request for recovery of defined infrastructure investments within its Water and Sewer Infrastructure Rate Adjustment, which adjusted the amount of revenue recovered in the infrastructure surcharges to $51 million and a net annualized revenue increase request of $95 million in the general rate case. On March 3, 2023, a settlement agreement was filed with the Missouri Public Service Commission, reflecting a proposed increase of $44 million in additional annualized revenues, excluding $51 million for infrastructure surcharges. A final decision on this matter is expected in the second quarter of 2023.On July 1, 2022, the Company’s California subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting an increase in 2024 revenue of $56 million and a total increase in revenue over the 2024 to 2026 period of $95 million, all as compared to 2022 revenues. The Company updated its filing in January 2023 to capture the authorized step increase effective January 1, 2023. The filing was also updated to incorporate a decoupling proposal and a revision to the Company’s sales and associated variable expense forecast. The revised filing requested additional annualized revenues for the test year 2024 of $37 million, compared to 2023 revenues. This excludes the proposed step rate and attrition rate increase for 2025 and 2026 of $20 million and $19 million, respectively. The total revenue requirement request for the three-year rate case cycle, incorporating updates to present rate revenues and forecasted demand, is $76 million.The Company’s California subsidiary submitted its application on May 3, 2021, to set its cost of capital for 2022 through 2024. On March 21, 2023, the California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”) issued a decision extending the deadline to August 10, 2023, for the cost of capital proceeding.
A number of states have authorized the use of regulatory mechanisms that permit rates to be adjusted outside of a general rate case for certain costs and investments, such as infrastructure surcharge mechanisms that permit recovery of capital investments to replace aging infrastructure. Presented in the table below are annualized incremental revenues, assuming a constant water sales volume and customer count, resulting from infrastructure surcharge authorizations that became effective during 2023:
(a)In 2023, $20 million was effective March 23 and $6 million was effective March 8.
On March 15, 2023, the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary filed an infrastructure surcharge proceeding requesting $16 million in additional annualized revenues.On March 1, 2023, the Company’s Kentucky subsidiary filed an infrastructure surcharge proceeding requesting $4 million in additional annualized revenues.
In September 2020, the CPUC released a decision under its Low-Income Rate Payer Assistance program rulemaking that required the Company’s California subsidiary to file a proposal to alter its water revenue adjustment mechanism in its next general rate case filing in 2022, which would become effective in January 2024. On October 5, 2020, the Company’s California subsidiary filed an application for rehearing of the decision and following the CPUC’s denial of its rehearing application in September 2021, the Company’s California subsidiary filed a petition for writ of review with the California Supreme Court on October 27, 2021. On May 18, 2022, the California Supreme Court issued a writ of review for the Company’s California subsidiary’s petition and the petitions filed by other entities challenging the decision. Independent of the judicial challenge, California passed Senate Bill 1469, which allows the CPUC to consider and authorize the implementation of a mechanism that separates the water corporation’s revenue and its water sales. Legislation was signed by the Governor on September 30, 2022, and became effective on January 1, 2023. In response to the legislation, on January 27, 2023, the Company’s California subsidiary filed an updated application requesting the CPUC to consider a Water Resources Sustainability Plan decoupling mechanism in its pending 2022 general rate case, which would be effective 2024 through 2026.On March 2, 2021, an administrative law judge (“ALJ”) in the Office of Administrative Law of New Jersey filed an initial decision with the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities (“NJBPU”) that recommended denial of a petition filed by the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary, which sought approval of acquisition adjustments in rate base of $29 million associated with the acquisitions of Shorelands Water Company, Inc. in 2017 and the Borough of Haddonfield’s water and wastewater systems in 2015. On July 29, 2021, the NJBPU issued an order adopting the ALJ’s initial decision without modification. The Company’s New Jersey subsidiary filed a Notice of Appeal with the New Jersey Appellate Division on September 10, 2021. The Company’s New Jersey subsidiary filed its brief in support of the appeal on March 4, 2022. Response and Reply briefs were filed on June 22, 2022, and August 4, 2022, respectively. Oral argument was held on March 22, 2023, and the Company expects a decision by the end of 2023. There is no financial impact to the Company as a result of the NJBPU’s order, since the acquisition adjustments are currently recorded as goodwill on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Presented in the table below are the Company’s consolidated results of operations:
The Company’s operating segments are comprised of its businesses which generate revenue, incur expense and have separate financial information which is regularly used by management to make operating decisions, assess performance and allocate resources. The Company operates its businesses primarily through one reportable segment, the Regulated Businesses segment. The Company also operates other businesses, primarily MSG, that do not meet the criteria of a reportable segment in accordance with GAAP, and are collectively presented throughout this Form 10-Q within “Other.” Other also includes corporate costs that are not allocated to the Company’s Regulated Businesses, interest income related to the seller promissory note and income from the revenue share agreement from the sale of HOS, eliminations of inter-segment transactions and fair value adjustments related to acquisitions that have not been allocated to the Regulated Businesses segment. This presentation is consistent with how management assesses the results of these businesses.
Presented in the table below is financial information for the Regulated Businesses:
Presented in the tables below is information regarding the main components of the Regulated Businesses’ operating revenues:
(a)Includes other operating revenues consisting primarily of miscellaneous utility charges, fees and rents.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, operating revenues increased $82 million, primarily due to a $71 million increase from authorized rate increases, including infrastructure surcharges, principally to fund infrastructure investment in various states and an $11 million increase from water and wastewater acquisitions, as well as organic growth in existing systems.
Presented in the table below is information regarding the main components of the Regulated Businesses’ operation and maintenance expense:
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, operation and maintenance expense increased $15 million, primarily due to inflationary pressures which resulted in increased fuel, power, and chemicals costs.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, depreciation and amortization increased $14 million, primarily due to additional utility plant placed in service from capital infrastructure investments and acquisitions.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, general taxes increased $5 million, primarily due to an increase in the New Jersey Gross Receipts Tax and incremental property taxes.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, other (expenses) increased $24 million, primarily due to higher interest expense as a result of an $800 million long-term debt issuance in May 2022 and higher interest rates on short-term debt. The increase was also due to higher net periodic pension and other postretirement benefit costs in the current period.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Regulated Businesses’ provision for income taxes increased $10 million. The Regulated Businesses’ effective income tax rate was 20.9% and 18.4% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the decrease in the amortization of EADIT pursuant to regulatory orders. The amortization of EADIT is generally offset with a reduction in revenue.
Presented in the table below is information for Other:
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, operating revenues increased $14 million, due primarily to the increase in capital projects in MSG, primarily at the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York and revenue for Naval Station Mayport in Jacksonville, Florida, awarded on June 30, 2022, with the performance start date for operation on March 1, 2023.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, operation and maintenance expense increased $13 million, primarily due to cost associated with increased capital projects in MSG and expenses for Naval Station Mayport, as discussed above.
During 2023, the Company’s regulatory jurisdictions enacted the following legislation that has been approved and is effective as of April 26, 2023:•California passed Senate Bill 1469, which allows the CPUC to consider and authorize the implementation of a mechanism that separates the water corporation’s revenue and its water sales. Legislation was signed by the Governor on September 30, 2022 and was effective on January 1, 2023.•Indiana passed House Bill 1417, which allows for deferred accounting and subsequent recovery through rates of regulatory assets, with or without Indiana Utility Regulatory Commission (the “IURC”) approval. There are several requirements: (i) the costs must be deferred as a regulatory asset, (ii) only incremental costs may be deferred, and (iii) the IURC must find the costs to be reasonable and prudent. Legislation was signed by the Governor and became effective on April 20, 2023.During 2023, the Company’s regulatory jurisdictions passed the following legislation, which is not yet effective as of April 26, 2023:•Indiana passed Senate Bill 180, which allows for consolidated revenue to support post-acquisition capital improvements in wastewater systems via a service enhancement improvement recovery mechanism.
All or portions of the Regulated Businesses’ utility assets could be acquired by state, municipal or other government entities through one or more of the following methods: (i) eminent domain (also known as condemnation); (ii) the right of purchase given or reserved by a municipality or political subdivision when the original certificate of public convenience and necessity (“CPCN”) was granted; and (iii) the right of purchase given or reserved under the law of the state in which the utility subsidiary was incorporated or from which it received its CPCN. The acquisition consideration related to such a proceeding initiated by a local government may be determined consistent with applicable eminent domain law, or may be negotiated or fixed by appraisers as prescribed by the law of the state or the jurisdiction of the particular CPCN.As such, the Regulated Businesses are periodically subject to condemnation proceedings in the ordinary course of business. For example, the Monterey water service system assets (the “Monterey system assets”) of the Company’s California subsidiary (“Cal Am”) are the subject of a potential condemnation action by the Monterey Peninsula Water Management District (the “MPWMD”) stemming from a November 2018 public ballot initiative. In 2019, the MPWMD issued a preliminary valuation and cost of service analysis report, finding in part that (1) an estimate of the Monterey system assets’ total value plus adjustments would be approximately $513 million, (2) the cost of service modeling results indicate significant annual reductions in revenue requirements and projected monthly water bills, and (3) the acquisition of the Monterey system assets by the MPWMD would be economically feasible. In 2020, the MPWMD certified a final environmental impact report, analyzing the environmental impacts of the MPWMD’s project to (1) acquire the Monterey system assets through the power of eminent domain, if necessary, and (2) expand its geographic boundaries to include all parts of this system.In February 2021, the MPWMD filed an application with the Local Agency Formation Commission of Monterey County (“LAFCO”) seeking approval to become a retail water provider and annex approximately 58 parcels of land into the MPWMD’s boundaries. In June 2021, LAFCO’s commissioners voted to require a third-party independent financial study as to the feasibility of an acquisition by the MPWMD of the Monterey system assets. In December 2021, LAFCO’s commissioners denied the MPWMD’s application to become a retail water provider, determining that the MPWMD does not have the authority to proceed with a condemnation of the Monterey system assets. On April 1, 2022, the MPWMD filed a lawsuit against LAFCO challenging its decision to deny the MPWMD’s application seeking approval to become a retail water provider. By letter dated October 3, 2022, the MPWMD notified Cal Am of a decision to appraise the Monterey system assets and requesting access to a number of Cal Am’s properties and documents to assist the MPWMD with such an appraisal. Cal Am responded by letter on October 24, 2022, denying the request for access, stating that the MPWMD does not have the right to appraise Cal Am’s system without LAFCO approval to become a retail water provider. Notwithstanding the denial by LAFCO of the MPWMD’s application seeking to be a retail water provider, the MPWMD notified Cal Am by letter dated April 3, 2023, of its offer to purchase the Monterey system assets for $448.8 million. Cal Am’s response is due by April 30, 2023, and it currently plans to reject the offer. The MPWMD has reserved its right to determine whether to acquire the Monterey system assets through the exercise of eminent domain. For more information on the lawsuit against LAFCO, see Item 3—Legal Proceedings in the Form 10-K and Part II, Item 1—Legal Proceedings—Proposed Acquisition of Monterey System Assets—Local Area Formation Commission Litigation in this Form 10-Q. Also, five municipalities in the Chicago, Illinois area (approximately 30,300 customers in total) formed a water agency and filed an eminent domain lawsuit against the Company in January 2013, seeking to condemn the water pipeline that serves those five municipalities. During a valuation trial held in January 2023, the parties settled the lawsuit and the water agency dismissed the eminent domain case, and as a result the Company will retain the pipeline. As part of the dismissal, the Company’s Illinois subsidiary and another subsidiary entered into a settlement agreement with the water agency agreeing to, among other things, maintain through December 31, 2027, the utility-specific wholesale water rate passed through to customers of the pipeline, such that the rate, exclusive of other pass-through charges, remains no higher than the current rate.Furthermore, the law in certain jurisdictions in which the Regulated Businesses operate provides for eminent domain rights allowing private property owners to file a lawsuit to seek just compensation against a public utility, if a public utility’s infrastructure has been determined to be a substantial cause of damage to that property. In these actions, the plaintiff would not have to prove that the public utility acted negligently. In California, for example, lawsuits have been filed in connection with large-scale natural events such as wildfires. Some of these lawsuits have included allegations that infrastructure of certain utilities triggered the natural event that resulted in damage to the property. In some cases, the PUC has allowed certain costs or losses incurred by the utility to be recovered from customers in rates, but in other cases such recovery in rates has been disallowed. Also, the utility may have obtained insurance that could respond to some or all of such losses, although the utility would be at risk for any losses not ultimately subject to rate or insurance recovery or losses that exceed the limits of such insurance.
On August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 (the “IRA”) was signed into law. The IRA contains a Corporate Alternative Minimum Tax (“CAMT”) provision, effective January 1, 2023. To determine if a company is considered an applicable corporation subject to CAMT, the company’s average adjusted financial statement income (“AFSI”) for the three consecutive years preceding the tax year must exceed $1 billion. An applicable corporation must make several adjustments to net income when determining AFSI. During the first quarter of 2023, the Company evaluated the potential impacts of the CAMT provision within the IRA and believes it does not exceed the $1 billion AFSI threshold, and therefore, is not currently subject to CAMT in 2023. The Company is continuing to assess the impact of the initial guidance regarding the application of the CAMT and will continue to monitor as additional guidance is released.
For a general overview of the sources and uses of capital resources, see the introductory discussion in Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Liquidity and Capital Resources in the Company’s Form 10-K.Liquidity needs for capital investment, working capital and other financial commitments are generally funded through cash flows from operations, public and private debt offerings, commercial paper markets, and, if and to the extent necessary, borrowings under American Water Capital Corp.’s (“AWCC”) revolving credit facility, and issuances of equity.The Company expects to fund future maturities of long-term debt through a combination of external debt and, to the extent available, cash flows from operations. Since the Company expects its capital investments over the next few years to be greater than its cash flows from operating activities, the Company currently plans to fund the excess of its capital investments over its cash flows from operating activities for the next five years through a combination of long-term debt and equity issuances, in addition to the remaining proceeds from the sale of HOS. The remaining proceeds from the sale of HOS include receipt of a seller promissory note, plus interest, and a contingent cash payment payable upon satisfaction of certain conditions on or before December 31, 2023. If necessary, the Company may delay certain capital investments or other funding requirements or pursue financing from other sources to preserve liquidity. In this event, the Company believes it can rely upon cash flows from operations to meet its obligations and fund its minimum required capital investments for an extended period of time.On March 3, 2023, the Company completed an underwritten public offering of an aggregate of 12,650,000 shares of its common stock. Upon closing of this offering, the Company received, after deduction of the underwriting discount and before deduction of offering expenses, net proceeds of approximately $1,688 million. The Company used the net proceeds of the offering to repay short-term commercial paper obligations of AWCC, the wholly owned finance subsidiary of American Water, and for general corporate purposes. The Company’s revolving credit facility provides $2.75 billion in aggregate total commitments from a diversified group of financial institutions. The revolving credit facility is used principally to support AWCC’s commercial paper program, to provide additional liquidity support, and to provide for the issuance of up to $150 million in letters of credit. The maximum aggregate principal amount of short-term borrowings authorized for issuance under AWCC’s commercial paper program is $2.60 billion. Subject to satisfying certain conditions, the credit agreement also permits AWCC to increase the maximum commitment under the facility by up to an aggregate of $500 million. As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, there were no borrowings and $78 million of outstanding letters of credit under the revolving credit facility. At March 31, 2023, there was no outstanding short-term debt as the proceeds of the equity securities offering were used to repay the short-term commercial paper obligations. At December 31, 2022, the weighted-average interest rate on AWCC’s outstanding short-term borrowings was approximately 4.41%.Presented in the tables below is the aggregate credit facility commitments, commercial paper limit and letter of credit availability under the revolving credit facility as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, as well as the available capacity for each:
(a)Total remaining availability of $2.67 billion as of March 31, 2023, may be accessed through revolver draws.
(a)Total remaining availability of $1.50 billion as of December 31, 2022, may be accessed through revolver draws.Presented in the table below is the Company’s total available liquidity as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively:
The Company believes that its ability to access the debt and equity capital markets, the revolving credit facility and cash flows from operations will generate sufficient cash to fund the Company’s short-term requirements. The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity and the ability to manage its expenditures, should there be a disruption of the capital and credit markets. However, there can be no assurance that the lenders will be able to meet existing commitments to AWCC under the revolving credit facility, or that AWCC will be able to access the commercial paper or loan markets in the future on acceptable terms or at all. See Note 8—Short-Term Debt in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.The Company has entered into eleven 10-year treasury lock agreements, with notional amounts totaling $300 million, to reduce interest rate exposure on debt expected to be issued in 2023. These treasury lock agreements terminate in January 2024, and have an average fixed rate of 3.47%. The Company designated these treasury lock agreements as cash flow hedges, with their fair value recorded in accumulated other comprehensive gain or loss. Upon termination, the cumulative gain or loss recorded in accumulated other comprehensive gain or loss will be amortized through interest, net over the term of the new debt. No ineffectiveness was recognized on hedging instruments for the three months ended March 31, 2023 or 2022.
Cash flows from operating activities primarily result from the sale of water and wastewater services and, due to the seasonality of demand, are generally greater during the warmer months. Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows from operating activities:
(a)Includes provision for losses on accounts receivable, pension and non-pension postretirement benefits and other non-cash, net. Details of each component can be found on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.(b)Changes in working capital include changes to receivables and unbilled revenues, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, accrued taxes, and other current assets and liabilities, net.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, cash provided by operating activities increased $131 million, primarily due to changes in deferred taxes and working capital. The change in deferred taxes was driven by the settlement of the deferred tax liability related to the Company’s New York regulated operations that was sold in the first quarter of 2022. Partially offset by the change in other non-cash activities including activity in regulatory accounts and pension and non-pension postretirement benefits.
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows from investing activities:
(a)Includes removal costs from property, plant and equipment retirements.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, cash used in investing activities increased $720 million, primarily due to proceeds received from the sale of the Company's New York operations in the first quarter of 2022 and increased payments for capital expenditures and acquisitions. The Company plans to invest approximately $2.9 billion across its footprint in 2023.
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows from financing activities:
(a)Includes proceeds from issuances of common stock under various employee stock plans and the Company’s dividend reinvestment and direct stock purchase plan, net of taxes paid, and advances and contributions in aid of construction, net of refunds.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, cash provided by financing activities increased $754 million, primarily due to the common stock offering. This was partially offset by repayment in full of the short-term commercial paper obligations during the first quarter of 2023.
The Company’s debt agreements contain financial and non-financial covenants. To the extent that the Company is not in compliance with these covenants, an event of default may occur under one or more debt agreements and the Company, or its subsidiaries, may be restricted in its ability to pay dividends, issue new debt or access the revolving credit facility. The long-term debt indentures contain a number of covenants that, among other things, prohibit or restrict the Company from issuing debt secured by the Company’s assets, subject to certain exceptions. Failure to comply with any of these covenants could accelerate repayment obligations.Covenants in certain long-term notes and the revolving credit facility require the Company to maintain a ratio of consolidated debt to consolidated capitalization (as defined in the relevant documents) of not more than 0.70 to 1.00. On March 31, 2023, the Company’s ratio was 0.54 to 1.00 and therefore the Company was in compliance with the covenants.
Presented in the table below are long-term and short-term credit ratings and rating outlooks as of April 26, 2023, as issued by Moody’s Investors Service on December 19, 2022, and S&P Global Ratings on February 6, 2023:
A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Security ratings are highly dependent upon the ability to generate cash flows in an amount sufficient to service debt and meet investment plans. The Company can provide no assurances that its ability to generate cash flows is sufficient to maintain its existing ratings. None of the Company’s borrowings are subject to default or prepayment as a result of the downgrading of these security ratings, although such a downgrading could increase fees and interest charges under its credit facility.As part of its normal course of business, the Company routinely enters into contracts for the purchase and sale of water, energy, chemicals and other services. These contracts either contain express provisions or otherwise permit the Company and its counterparties to demand adequate assurance of future performance when there are reasonable grounds for doing so. In accordance with the contracts and applicable contract law, if the Company is downgraded by a credit rating agency, especially if such downgrade is to a level below investment grade, it is possible that a counterparty would attempt to rely on such a downgrade as a basis for making a demand for adequate assurance of future performance, which could include a demand that the Company must provide collateral to secure its obligations. The Company does not expect to post any collateral which will have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial position or cash flows.Access to the capital markets, including the commercial paper market, and respective financing costs in those markets, may be directly affected by the Company’s securities ratings. The Company primarily accesses the debt capital markets, including the commercial paper market, through AWCC. However, the Company has also issued debt through its regulated subsidiaries, primarily in the form of mortgage bonds and tax-exempt securities or borrowings under state revolving funds, to lower the overall cost of debt.
Financial condition of the Company, results of operations and cash flows, as reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Financial statements, are impacted by the methods, assumptions and estimates used in the application of critical accounting policies. See Part II, Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates in the Company’s Form 10-K for a discussion of its critical accounting policies. Additionally, see Note 2—Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for updates, if any, to the significant accounting policies previously disclosed in the Company’s Form 10-K.