
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") as codified in the Accounting Standards Codification. The following information should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included in Part I, Item 1. Financial Statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
In the first quarter of 2023, Net Sales decreased $54 million, or 4%, to $1.396 billion compared to the first quarter of 2022, reflecting a decrease in both transactions and average dollar sale. In our stores and direct channels, Net Sales decreased 2% to $1.034 billion, and 12% to $280 million, respectively. In our international business, Net Sales increased 13% to $82 million.In the first quarter of 2023, Operating Income decreased $99 million, or 35%, to $181 million, from $280 million in the first quarter of 2022, and the Operating Income rate (expressed as a percentage of Net Sales) decreased to 12.9% from 19.3%. These decreases were due to declines in Gross Profit dollars and rate, as a result of the decline in Net Sales as well as continued inflationary pressures in raw materials and investments in product formulations and packaging innovation, and increases in General, Administrative and Store Operating expenses and rate, as a result of investments in technology in connection with our information technology ("IT") separation from Victoria's Secret, increased customer-facing associate wages and other corporate expenses. We expect our IT separation to be substantially complete in the summer of 2023.For additional information related to our first quarter 2023 financial performance, see “Results of Operations.”
We anticipate continued macroeconomic uncertainty and a continuation of first quarter of 2023 sales trends in the second quarter of 2023, with a moderate improvement in the back half of the year as we anniversary softer sales trends. We anticipate modest cost deflation benefits in the second quarter of 2023 and increasing deflation benefits in the second half of 2023, which we expect will be partially offset by investments in product formulation and packaging innovation. General, Administrative and Store Operating Expenses are expected to deleverage compared to 2022, driven by lower Net Sales, expenses related to our IT separation and increased customer-facing associate wages, partially offset by the expected benefits of our profit optimization work (discussed below).
We are evaluating our cost structure and taking actions to offset ongoing cost pressures in both Gross Profit and General, Administrative and Store Operating Expenses. We are targeting $200 million of annual cost savings across the Company, and we expect to achieve more than $100 million of cost savings in 2023. We expect to realize increased savings as we move through 2023, including savings in freight and store selling expenses, as well as in home office and indirect spend. We expect to realize a substantial portion of the remaining benefits in 2024.
In addition to our results provided in accordance with GAAP above and throughout this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, provided below are non-GAAP measurements which present net income and earnings per diluted share for the first quarter of 2023 on an adjusted basis, to remove a certain special item recorded in the first quarter of 2023. We believe that this special item is not indicative of our ongoing operations due to its size and nature. We did not make any adjustments to our results in the first quarter of 2022. We use adjusted financial information as key performance measures of results of operations for the purpose of evaluating performance internally. These non-GAAP measurements are not intended to replace the presentation of our financial results in accordance with GAAP. Instead, we believe that the presentation of adjusted financial information provides additional information to investors to facilitate the comparison of past and present operations. Further, our definitions of adjusted financial information may differ from similarly titled measures used by other companies. The table below reconciles the first quarter of 2023 GAAP financial measures to the non-GAAP financial measures:
(a)In the first quarter of 2023, we recognized a pre-tax gain of $7 million (after-tax gain of $5 million) related to the repurchase and extinguishment of outstanding notes. For additional information, see Note 7, "Long-term Debt and Borrowing Facilities" included in Part I, Item 1. Financial Statements.
The following table compares Company-operated U.S. store data for the first quarters of 2023 and 2022:
(a)Sales per average selling square foot and sales per average store, which are indicators of store productivity, are calculated based on store sales for the period divided by the average, including the beginning and end of period, of total square footage and store count, respectively.The following table represents Company-operated store data for the first quarter of 2023:
The following table represents Company-operated store data for the first quarter of 2022:
The following table represents partner-operated store data for the first quarter of 2023:
The following table represents partner-operated store data for the first quarter of 2022:
The following table provides Net Sales for the first quarter of 2023 in comparison to the first quarter of 2022:
(a)Results include royalties associated with franchised stores and wholesale sales.
The following table provides a reconciliation of Net Sales for the first quarter of 2023 to the first quarter of 2022:
For the first quarter of 2023, Net Sales decreased $54 million, to $1.396 billion, compared to the first quarter of 2022. Net Sales decreased in the stores channel by $25 million, or 2%, primarily due to declines in both average dollar sales and transactions. Direct Net Sales decreased $38 million, or 12%, primarily due to a decline in orders, which was partially due to our customers continuing to select our buy online-pick up in store ("BOPIS") option (which is recognized as store Net Sales) as we continued to expand BOPIS availability in the U.S. We completed our rollout of BOPIS capabilities to our U.S. stores in the first quarter of 2023. International Net Sales increased $9 million, or 13%, primarily due to new stores opened by our partners.In terms of category performance, Net Sales in home fragrance and soaps and sanitizers were down compared to 2022 primarily driven by normalization following the COVID-19 pandemic. Though total body care Net Sales decreased compared to the first quarter of 2022, Net Sales in our men's and wellness categories increased during the period.
For the first quarter of 2023, our Gross Profit decreased $73 million to $596 million, and our Gross Profit rate (expressed as a percentage of Net Sales) decreased to 42.7% from 46.1%. Gross Profit decreased due to the decline in Net Sales, a decline in the merchandise margin rate primarily driven by approximately $13 million of inflationary pressures largely related to raw materials, further investments in product formulations and packaging innovation, and an increase in occupancy expenses associated with store growth and investments in our new Company-operated direct channel fulfillment center and other distribution capabilities. The Gross Profit rate decline was driven by Buying and Occupancy expense deleverage due to lower Net Sales and the decline in the merchandise margin rate due to the factors discussed above.
The following table provides detail for our General, Administrative and Store Operating Expenses for the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022:
For the first quarter of 2023, our General, Administrative and Store Operating Expenses increased $26 million to $415 million, and the rate (expressed as a percentage of Net Sales) increased to 29.7% from 26.8%. Our home office expenses increased primarily due to our investments in technology, in connection with our IT separation, as well as other corporate expenses, partially offset by the early benefits of our profit optimization initiatives. Our Selling Expenses remained generally flat as the decreases due to the decline in Net Sales and efficiencies in store labor hours were mostly offset by increases in store wage rates.The General, Administrative and Store Operating Expense rate increased primarily due to our investments in technology, which accounted for approximately half of the rate increase, as well as deleverage on lower Net Sales and other expenses.
The following table provides the average daily borrowings and average borrowing rates for the first quarters of 2023 and 2022:
For the first quarter of 2023, our interest expense was $89 million, which was flat to the first quarter of 2022. Our lower average daily borrowings were offset by a higher average borrowing rate.
For the first quarter of 2023, our other income was $20 million, primarily due to interest income on cash balances and a pre-tax gain of $7 million associated with the repurchases and early extinguishments of outstanding notes.
For the first quarter of 2023, our effective tax rate was 27.7% compared to 19.4% in the first quarter of 2022. The first quarter of 2023 rate was higher than our combined estimated federal and state statutory rate primarily due to accrued interest expense related to unrecognized tax benefits. The first quarter of 2022 rate was lower than our combined estimated federal and state statutory rates primarily due to the recognition of excess tax benefits recorded through the Consolidated Statements of Income on share-based awards that vested.
Liquidity, or access to cash, is an important factor in determining our financial stability. We are committed to maintaining adequate liquidity. Cash generated from our operating activities provides the primary resources to support current operations, growth initiatives, seasonal funding requirements, future common stock and debt repurchases, and capital expenditures. Our cash provided from operations is impacted by our net income and working capital changes. Our net income is impacted by, among other things, sales volume, seasonal sales patterns, success of new product introductions, profit margins, income taxes and inflationary pressures. Historically, our sales are higher during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year due to seasonal and holiday-related sales patterns. Generally, our need for working capital peaks during the summer and fall months as inventory builds in anticipation of the holiday period. Our cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries were $101 million as of April 29, 2023. During the first quarter of 2023, we repurchased and extinguished $84 million principal amount of our outstanding senior notes for an aggregate repurchase price of $76 million. We may, from time to time, repurchase, or otherwise retire, additional debt or shares of common stock, as applicable.We believe that our current cash position, our cash flow generated from operations and our borrowing capacity under our asset-backed revolving credit facility (“ABL Facility”) will be sufficient to meet our liquidity needs, including capital expenditure requirements, for at least the next twelve months.
The following table provides a summary of our working capital position and capitalization as of April 29, 2023, January 28, 2023 and April 30, 2022:
(a)The January 28, 2023 amounts represent a fifty-two-week period, and the April 29, 2023 and April 30, 2022 amounts represent thirteen-week periods.(b)Our borrowing base was $623 million, $525 million and $620 million as of April 29, 2023, January 28, 2023 and April 30, 2022, respectively. We had outstanding letters of credit, which reduce our availability under the ABL Facility, of $16 million as of each of these dates.
The following table provides a summary of our cash flow activity during the first quarters of 2023 and 2022:
Net cash provided by operating activities in the first quarter of 2023 was $44 million, including net income of $81 million. Net income included depreciation of $63 million, share-based compensation expense of $7 million and a pre-tax gain on extinguishment of debt of $7 million. Other changes in assets and liabilities represent items that had a current period cash flow impact, such as changes in working capital. The most significant items in working capital were the seasonal changes in Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenses and Other, Accounts Receivable and Inventories.Net cash provided by operating activities in the first quarter of 2022 was $66 million, including net income of $155 million. Net income included depreciation of $53 million and share-based compensation expense of $12 million. Other changes in assets and liabilities represent items that had a current period cash flow impact, such as changes in working capital. The most significant items in working capital were the seasonal changes in Inventories, Accounts Payable, Accrued Expenses and Other, and Accounts Receivable. Additionally, we proactively pulled forward the purchase and delivery of certain Inventory items in the first quarter of 2022 to mitigate against potential global supply chain and distribution network disruptions.
Net cash used for investing activities in the first quarter of 2023 was $94 million, primarily related to capital expenditures. The capital expenditures included approximately $40 million related to new, off-mall stores and remodels of existing stores, and approximately $35 million for various IT projects primarily supporting the separation of our IT systems from Victoria's Secret's IT systems.Net cash used for investing activities in the first quarter of 2022 was $88 million related to capital expenditures. The capital expenditures included $37 million related to new off-mall stores and remodels, $27 million for our new Company-operated direct channel fulfillment center and $12 million related to IT projects.We continue to plan for approximately $300 million to $350 million of capital expenditures in 2023, focused on investments to support long-term growth. We are prioritizing investments in select remodels to the White Barn store design and new off-mall store openings. We are also investing in our technology, distribution, and logistics capabilities to better serve our customers.
Net cash used for financing activities in the first quarter of 2023 was $135 million, consisting of $74 million for open market debt repurchases, dividend payments of $0.20 per share, or $46 million, and $8 million of tax payments related to share-based awards.Net cash used for financing activities in the first quarter of 2022 was $1.306 billion consisting of $1.227 billion in payments for share repurchases, including the payment of $1 billion related to our accelerated share repurchase program, dividend payments of $0.20 per share, or $48 million, and $26 million of tax payments related to share-based awards.
Our Board of Directors (the "Board") will determine share and debt repurchase authorizations, giving consideration to our levels of profit and cash flow, capital requirements, current and forecasted liquidity, the restrictions placed upon us by our borrowing arrangements as well as financial and other conditions existing at the time. We use cash flow generated from operating and financing activities to fund our share or debt repurchase programs. The timing and amount of any repurchases will be made at our discretion, taking into account a number of factors, including market conditions.
In February 2022, our Board authorized a $1.5 billion share repurchase program (the "February 2022 Program"). We did not repurchase any shares of our common stock during the first quarter of 2023. The February 2022 Program had $188 million of remaining authority as of April 29, 2023. Subsequent to April 29, 2023 through June 2, 2023, we repurchased an additional 216 thousand shares of our common stock for $8 million under the February 2022 Program.
Our Board will determine future dividends after giving consideration to our levels of profit and cash flow, capital requirements, current and forecasted liquidity, the restrictions placed upon us by our borrowing arrangements as well as financial and other conditions existing at the time. We use cash flow generated from operating and financing activities to fund our dividends.
We paid the following dividends during the first quarters of 2023 and 2022:
In May 2023, our Board declared the second quarter 2023 ordinary dividend of $0.20 per share payable on June 16, 2023 to stockholders of record at the close of business on June 2, 2023.
The following table provides our outstanding long-term debt balance, net of unamortized debt issuance costs and discounts, as of April 29, 2023, January 28, 2023 and April 30, 2022:
During the first quarter of 2023, we repurchased in the open market and extinguished $84 million principal amount of our outstanding senior notes. The aggregate repurchase price for these notes was $76 million, resulting in a pre-tax gain of $7 million, net of the write-off of unamortized issuance costs. This gain is included in Other Income in the first quarter of 2023 Consolidated Statement of Income.  There were $2 million of repurchases reflected in Accounts Payable on the April 29, 2023 Consolidated Balance Sheet.The following table provides details of the outstanding principal amount of senior notes repurchased and extinguished during the first quarter of 2023:
Subsequent to April 29, 2023 through June 2, 2023, we repurchased in the open market and extinguished $50 million principal amount of our outstanding senior notes for an aggregate repurchase price of $46 million.
We and certain of our 100% owned subsidiaries guarantee and pledge collateral to secure our ABL Facility. The ABL Facility, which allows borrowings and letters of credit in U.S. dollars or Canadian dollars, has aggregate commitments of $750 million and an expiration date in August 2026.Availability under the ABL Facility is the lesser of (i) the borrowing base, determined primarily based on our eligible U.S. and Canadian credit card receivables, accounts receivable, inventory and eligible real property, or (ii) the aggregate commitment. If at any time the outstanding amount under the ABL Facility exceeds the lesser of (i) the borrowing base and (ii) the aggregate commitment, we are required to repay the outstanding amounts under the ABL Facility to the extent of such excess. As of April 29, 2023, our borrowing base was $623 million, and we had no borrowings outstanding under the ABL Facility.The ABL Facility supports our letter of credit program. We had $16 million of outstanding letters of credit as of April 29, 2023 that reduced our availability under the ABL Facility. As of April 29, 2023, our availability under the ABL Facility was $607 million.As of April 29, 2023, the ABL Facility fees related to committed and unutilized amounts were 0.30% per annum, and the fees related to outstanding letters of credit were 1.25% per annum. In addition, the interest rate on outstanding U.S. dollar borrowings was the London Interbank Offered Rate plus 1.25% per annum. The interest rate on outstanding Canadian dollar-denominated borrowings was the Canadian Dollar Offered Rate plus 1.25% per annum. The ABL Facility requires us to maintain a fixed charge coverage ratio of not less than 1.00 to 1.00 during an event of default or any period commencing on any day when specified excess availability is less than the greater of (i) $70 million or (ii) 10% of the maximum borrowing amount. As of April 29, 2023, we were not required to maintain this ratio.
The following table provides our credit ratings as of April 29, 2023:
Certain of our subsidiaries, which are listed on Exhibit 22 to this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, have guaranteed our obligations under the 2025 Notes, 2027 Notes, 2028 Notes, 2029 Notes, 2030 Notes, 2035 Notes and 2036 Notes (collectively, the "Notes").The Notes have been issued by Bath & Body Works, Inc. (the “Parent Company”). The Notes are its senior unsecured obligations and rank equally in right of payment with all of our existing and future senior unsecured obligations, are senior to any of our future subordinated indebtedness, are effectively subordinated to all of our existing and future indebtedness that is secured by a lien and are structurally subordinated to all existing and future obligations of each of our subsidiaries that do not guarantee the Notes.The Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several basis by certain of our wholly-owned subsidiaries, including certain subsidiaries that also guarantee our obligations under our ABL Facility (such guarantees, the “Guarantees”; and, such guaranteeing subsidiaries, the “Subsidiary Guarantors”). The Guarantees of the Subsidiary Guarantors are subject to release in limited circumstances only upon the occurrence of certain customary conditions. Each Guarantee is limited, by its terms, to an amount not to exceed the maximum amount that can be guaranteed by the applicable Subsidiary Guarantor subject to avoidance under applicable fraudulent conveyance provisions of U.S. and non-U.S. law.The following tables set forth summarized financial information for the Parent Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors, on a combined basis after elimination of (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Parent Company and the Subsidiary Guarantors and (ii) investments in and equity in the earnings of non-Guarantor subsidiaries.
(a)Includes amounts due from non-Guarantor subsidiaries of $613 million and $589 million as of April 29, 2023 and January 28, 2023, respectively.(b)Includes amounts due from non-Guarantor subsidiaries of $40 million as of January 28, 2023.(c)Includes amounts due to non-Guarantor subsidiaries of $1.977 billion and $1.987 billion as of April 29, 2023 and January 28, 2023, respectively.
(a)Includes net sales of $50 million to non-Guarantor subsidiaries.(b)Includes a net loss of $6 million related to transactions with non-Guarantor subsidiaries.
In connection with the spin-off of Victoria's Secret and the disposal of a certain other business, we had remaining contingent obligations of $278 million as of April 29, 2023 related to lease payments under the current terms of noncancelable leases, primarily related to office space, expiring at various dates through 2037. These obligations include minimum rent and additional payments covering taxes, common area costs and certain other expenses and relate to leases that commenced prior to the disposition of these businesses. Our reserves related to these obligations were not significant for any period presented.
Our contractual obligations primarily consist of long-term debt and the related interest payments, operating leases, purchase orders for merchandise inventory and other long-term obligations. These contractual obligations impact our short-term and long-term liquidity and capital resource needs. Other than the repurchase of $84 million principal amount of our outstanding senior notes during the first quarter of 2023, there have been no material changes in our contractual obligations subsequent to January 28, 2023, as discussed in “Contingent Liabilities and Contractual Obligations” in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain of our contractual obligations may fluctuate during the normal course of business (primarily changes in our merchandise inventory-related purchase obligations which fluctuate throughout the year as a result of the seasonal nature of our business).
We did not adopt any new accounting standards in the first quarter of 2023 that had a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows. In addition, as of June 2, 2023, there were no new accounting standards that we have not yet adopted that are expected to have a material impact on our consolidated results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to adopt accounting policies related to estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments, including those related to inventories, valuation of long-lived store assets, claims and contingencies, income taxes and revenue recognition, including revenue associated with our loyalty program. Management bases our estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates.There have been no material changes to the critical accounting policies and estimates disclosed in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.