
This discussion should be read in conjunction with the information contained in both our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2022 and the condensed consolidated financial statements for the three months ended March 31, 2023.Overview.  We are a multinational manufacturer and worldwide distributor of our own life science research and clinical diagnostics products.  Our business is organized into two reportable segments, Life Science and Clinical Diagnostics, with the mission to provide scientists with specialized tools needed for biological research and health care specialists with products needed for clinical diagnostics.  We sell more than 12,000 products and services to a diverse client base comprised of scientific research, healthcare, education and government customers worldwide. We do not disclose quantitative information about our different products and services as it is impractical to do so based primarily on the numerous products and services that we sell and the global markets that we serve.We manufacture and supply our customers with a range of reagents, apparatus and equipment to separate complex chemical and biological materials and to identify, analyze and purify components. As our customers require standardization for their experiments and test results, much of our revenues are recurring in nature.  We are impacted by the support of many governments for both research and healthcare. The current global economic outlook is still uncertain as the need to control government social spending by many governments limits opportunities for growth.  Approximately 44% of our year-to-date 2023 consolidated net sales are derived from the United States and approximately 56% are derived from international locations, with Europe being our largest international region. The international sales are largely denominated in local currencies such as the Euro, Swiss Franc, Japanese Yen, Chinese Yuan and British Sterling. As a result, our consolidated net sales expressed in dollars benefit when the U.S. dollar weakens and suffer when the dollar strengthens. When the U.S. dollar strengthens, we benefit from lower cost of sales from our own international manufacturing sites, and from lower international operating expenses. We regularly discuss our changes in revenue and expense categories in terms of both changing foreign exchange rates and in terms of a currency neutral basis, if notable, to explain the impact currency has on our results.
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and, we expect to some extent, will continue to impact parts of our business, operations, financial condition and results of operations in a variety of ways. During the first quarter of 2023, demand for products associated with COVID-19 testing and related research was minimal. Delays and shortages in the supply of components and raw materials continued in the first quarter of 2023, but we have seen improvements. These shortages, along with a slower production ramp up with our manufacturing transition to Asia, have caused a backlog of sales orders, some of which we consider to be significant, and some delays in certain new product development activities. They have also led to increases in inventory as we continue to receive available materials and source those in short supply. While we are making significant progress in procuring required materials, we expect the backlog of sales orders to continue through the remainder of 2023.  For more discussion relating to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and supply chain constraints, please see "Item 1A. Risk Factors" to this Form 10-Q.
The following table shows cost of goods sold, gross profit, components of operating expense, losses from change in fair market value of equity securities and loan receivable, and net income (loss) as a percentage of net sales:
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, if different estimates reasonably could have been used, or if changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could materially impact the financial statements. Management believes that there have been no significant changes during the three months ended March 31, 2023 to the items that we disclosed as our critical accounting policies and estimates in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022.  There have been no substantial changes in our significant accounting policies during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the significant accounting policies described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Percentage sales growth in currency neutral amounts are calculated by translating prior period sales in each local currency using the current period monthly average foreign exchange rates for that currency and comparing that to current period sales.Net sales (sales) for the first quarter of 2023 were $676.8 million compared to $700.1 million in the first quarter of 2022, a decrease of 3.3%.  COVID-related sales were $2.6 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to approximately $45.3 million in the first quarter of 2022. Excluding the impact of foreign currency, first quarter 2023 sales decreased by approximately 0.3% compared to the same period in 2022. Currency neutral sales increased in the Americas, but this was offset by decreased sales in EMEA and Asia Pacific. Excluding COVID-related sales, sales increased 6.1% on a currency neutral basis from the first quarter of 2022.  The Life Science segment sales for the first quarter of 2023 were $323.6 million, a decrease of 6.8% compared to the same period last year. On a currency neutral basis, sales decreased 3.6% compared to the first quarter of 2022. Currency neutral sales decreased in both Asia Pacific and EMEA, partially offset by increased sales in the Americas. COVID-related sales were $2.3 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to approximately $44.2 million in the first quarter of 2022. Excluding COVID-related sales, sales increased 9.6% on a currency neutral basis driven by increased sales of Gene Expression, Western Blotting and Droplet Digital PCR products.The Clinical Diagnostics segment sales for the first quarter of 2023 were $352.1 million, an increase of 0.1% compared to the same period last year.  On a currency neutral basis, sales increased 2.8% compared to the first quarter of 2022. Currency neutral sales increased in Asia Pacific, partially offset by a decrease in Europe and the Americas. COVID-related sales were $0.3 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to approximately $1.1 million in the first quarter of 2022. Excluding COVID-related sales, sales increased 3.1% on a currency neutral basis. The currency neutral sales increase was primarily driven by an increased demand for our diagnostic testing systems, despite the continuing effect of supply chain constraints.Consolidated gross margins were 53.5% for the first quarter of 2023 compared to 57.5% for the first quarter of 2022. Gross margins for the Life Science segment and the Clinical Diagnostics segment for the first quarter of 2023 decreased by approximately 5.6 percentage points and 2.2 percentage points respectively from the same period last year. The decrease in gross margins was primarily driven by product mix, higher logistics costs, and higher material costs.   Selling, general and administrative expenses (SG&A) increased to $225.6 million or 33.3% of sales for the first quarter of 2023 compared to $196.7 million or 28.1% of sales for the first quarter of 2022. The increase to SG&A was driven by costs related to a restructuring initiative that was recorded in the first quarter of 2023, as well as higher employee related, marketing and travel expenses.Research and development (R&D) expenses increased to $75.0 million or 11.1% of sales in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $59.5 million or 8.5% of sales in the first quarter of 2022.  Life Science segment R&D expense increased in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the prior year period, primarily from increased investment to complete strategic projects in key investment areas, higher employee related expenses, and costs related to a restructuring initiative that was recorded in the first quarter of 2023. Clinical Diagnostics segment R&D expense increased in the first quarter of 2023 from the prior year period driven by continued investment in new strategic development projects, higher employee related expenses, and costs related to a restructuring initiative that was recorded in the first quarter of 2023.
Interest expense for the first quarter of 2023 and 2022 was $12.3 million and $4.0 million, respectively, an increase of $8.3 million compared to the prior year period.  The increase was primarily due to interest accrued on the $1.2 billion Senior Notes, as well as the associated amortization of discounts and debt issues costs. (see Note 7, "Long-term Debt" in the condensed consolidated financial statements).    Foreign currency exchange gains, net consist primarily of foreign currency transaction gains and losses on intercompany net receivables and payables and the change in fair value of our forward foreign exchange contracts used to manage our foreign currency exchange risk.  Foreign currency exchange gains, net were $2.3 million for the first quarter of 2023 compared to foreign currency exchange gain, net of $2.1 million for the first quarter of 2022.  Gains and losses are primarily due to the estimating process inherent in the timing of product shipments and intercompany debt payments, market volatility, and the change in the fair value of our foreign exchange contracts.Losses from change in fair market value of equity securities and loan receivable was a loss of $17.5 million and $4.55 billion for the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively.  The change in the fair market value primarily resulted from the recognition of holding losses of $20 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to holding losses of $4.5 billion in the first quarter of 2022 on our position in Sartorius AG. In addition, in the first quarter of 2023, there was a loss of $2.2 million in the change in fair market value of the Loan we entered into with SHB compared to a loss of $89.9 million in the first quarter of 2022.Other income, net for the first quarter of 2023 was income, net of $50.4 million compared to income, net of $32.6 million for the first quarter of 2022. The difference of income, net of $17.8 million was primarily attributable to an increase in interest income due to the funds invested as part of the bond proceeds and a higher dividend income from Sartorius AG.Our effective income tax rate was 18.7% and 22.9% for the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively.  The effective tax rate reported in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily affected by benefits associated with preferential tax rate related to export sales and an increase in research and development costs. The tax rate reported in the first quarter of 2022 was primarily affected by an unrealized loss in equity securities. The difference in the rate is primarily driven by geographical mix of earnings.
Bio-Rad operates and conducts business globally, primarily through subsidiary companies established in the markets in which we trade.  Goods are manufactured in a small number of locations, and are then shipped to local distribution facilities around the world.  Our product mix is diversified, and certain products compete largely on product efficacy, while others compete on price.  Gross margins are generally sufficient to exceed normal operating costs, and funding for research and development of new products, as well as routine outflows for capital expenditures, interest and taxes.  In addition to the annual positive cash flow from operating activities, additional liquidity is readily available via the sale of short-term investments and access to our $200.0 million unsecured revolving credit facility (Credit Agreement, as amended) that we entered into in April 2019, and to a lesser extent international lines of credit.  Borrowings under the Credit Agreement, as amended, are available on a revolving basis and can be used to make permitted acquisitions, for working capital and for other general corporate purposes.  We had no outstanding borrowings under the 2019 Credit Agreement, as amended, as of March 31, 2023, however, $0.2 million was utilized for domestic standby letters of credit that reduced our borrowing availability. As of March 31, 2023, our short-term investments include the net cash proceeds from the sale of Senior Notes of $1.186 billion. Management believes that this availability, together with cash flow from operations, will be adequate to meet our current objectives for operations, research and development, capital additions for manufacturing and distribution, plant and equipment, information technology systems and acquisitions of reasonable proportion to our existing total available capital.At March 31, 2023, we had available $1.86 billion in cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments, of which approximately 10% was held in our foreign subsidiaries.  The amount of funds held in the United States can fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as acquisitions and borrowings. As part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of domestic and foreign cash flows (both inflows and outflows).It is generally our intention to repatriate certain foreign earnings to the extent that such repatriations are not restricted by local laws or accounting rules, and there are no substantial incremental costs.
Net cash provided by operations was $98.1 million compared to cash provided by operations of $50.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase in operating cash flows was primarily due to higher cash received from customers, lower cash paid to suppliers and to employees, and lower income taxes paid.  These increases were partially offset by higher interest paid, higher payments for foreign exchange contracts, and timing of dividend proceeds and miscellaneous receipts, net.
Our investing activities have consisted primarily of cash used for purchases of marketable securities and investments, and acquisitions.Net cash used in investing activities was $70.5 million and $916.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The decrease was primarily attributable to the purchase of marketable securities and investments utilizing the cash proceeds from the sale of the senior notes.  The decrease was partially offset by higher proceeds from sales of marketable securities and investments and higher proceeds from maturities of marketable securities and investments as a result of the cash proceeds invested from the sale of the senior notes.
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of cash from the issuance of senior notes.Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.3 million compared to cash provided by financing activities of $1,190.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, and 2022, respectively. This decrease was primarily attributable to the net cash proceeds from the issuance of Senior Notes received in the first quarter of 2022.
No shares were repurchased during the first quarter of 2023 and 2022. As of March 31, 2023, $207.4 million remained available for repurchases under the Share Repurchase Program.See Note 1 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for recent accounting pronouncements adopted.