
We are an energy technology company with a broad and diversified portfolio of technologies and services that span the energy and industrial value chain. We conduct business in more than 120 countries and employ approximately 56,000 employees. We operate through our two business segments: Oilfield Services & Equipment ("OFSE") and Industrial & Energy Technology ("IET"). We sell products and services primarily in the global oil and gas markets, within the upstream, midstream and downstream segments.
As we look at 2023, the macro environment remains volatile with elevated recession risk for major developed economies. Despite these challenges, we expect the supply-demand balance in the global oil markets to gradually tighten over the course of the year. Factors driving this include China’s economy recovering, demand continuing to grow in countries outside the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC+) remaining proactive in maintaining adequate and stable oil price levels. We expect this macro backdrop to still support a double-digit increase in global upstream spending in 2023, with multiple international projects being executed and the offshore development pipeline growing.We believe that the current spending cycle is more durable and less sensitive to commodity price swings relative to prior cycles. Factors driving this extended cycle include financially strong operator balance sheets, disciplined capital spending focused on returns versus growth, and both independent oil companies and national oil companies balancing modest production growth with longer-term investments in new energy.Another notable characteristic of this cycle is the continued shift towards the development of natural gas and LNG. As the world increasingly recognizes the crucial role natural gas is expected to play in the energy transition, serving as both a transition and destination fuel, the case for a multi-decade growth opportunity in gas is steadily improving. This is driving operators of all sizes to dedicate more spending towards natural gas development, as well as LNG projects and associated infrastructure.
In the first quarter of 2023, we generated revenue of $5,716 million compared to $4,835 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in revenue was driven by increased activity in our OFSE and IET segments. Operating income in the first quarter of 2023 was $438 million compared to $279 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in operating income was driven primarily by higher segment operating income from OFSE. Income before income taxes was $760 million for the first quarter of 2023, which included a gain of $392 million from the change in fair value on certain equity investments. In the first quarter of 2022, income before income taxes was $187 million, which included a gain of $11 million from the change in fair value on certain equity investments.Our results in the first quarter of 2023 were impacted by the discontinuation of our Russia operations that occurred in 2022. Russia represented approximately 4% of our total revenue in the first quarter of 2022, the majority of which was in our OFSE segment.In 2022, we announced a reorganization of the Company from four to two operating segments, OFSE and IET. To date, we have made great progress on this transformation, which is designed to create a leaner, more simplified organization which we expect to enable faster decision making and better position the Company for the future of the energy markets.We continue to invest in the Baker Hughes portfolio through strategic acquisitions and early-stage new energy investments. In April 2023, we closed on the acquisition of Altus Intervention, a leading international provider of well intervention services and downhole technology, which will enhance OFSE's existing intervention solutions business and add new technology that can be scaled into new geographic markets. Also in April 2023, we closed on the disposition of our Nexus Controls business to GE. GE will continue to provide Baker Hughes with GE’s MarkTM controls products currently in the Nexus Controls portfolio.
Our business is exposed to a number of macro factors, which influence our outlook and expectations given the current volatile conditions in the industry. All of our outlook expectations are purely based on the market as we see it today and are subject to changing conditions in the industry.•OFSE North America activity: We expect North American spending to continue to improve in 2023, as compared to 2022, should commodity prices remain at current levels.•OFSE International activity: We expect spending outside of North America to experience strong growth in 2023, as compared to 2022, should commodity prices remain at current levels.•IET LNG projects: We remain optimistic on the LNG market long-term and view natural gas as a transition and destination fuel. We continue to view the long-term economics of the LNG industry as positive.We have other businesses in our portfolio that are more correlated with various industrial metrics, including global GDP growth. We also have businesses within our portfolio that are exposed to new energy solutions, specifically focused around reducing carbon emissions of the energy and broader industry, including hydrogen, geothermal, carbon capture, utilization and storage, and energy storage. We expect to see continued growth in these businesses as new energy solutions become a more prevalent part of the broader energy mix.Overall, we believe our portfolio is well positioned to compete across the energy value chain and deliver comprehensive solutions for our customers. We remain optimistic about the long-term economics of the oil and gas industry, but we are continuing to operate with flexibility. Over time, we believe the world’s demand for energy will continue to rise, and that hydrocarbons will play a major role in meeting the world's energy needs for the foreseeable future. As such, we remain focused on delivering innovative, low-emission, and cost-effective solutions that deliver step changes in operating and economic performance for our customers.
We believe we have an important role to play in society as an industry leader and partner. We view environmental, social, and governance as a key lever to transform the performance of our Company and our industry. In January 2019, we made a commitment to reduce Scope 1 and 2 carbon dioxide equivalent emissions from our operations by 50% by 2030, achieving net zero emissions by 2050. We continue to make progress on emissions reductions, and reported in our 2021 Corporate Responsibility report a 23% reduction in our Scope 1 and 2 carbon dioxide equivalent emissions compared to our 2019 base year.
Our revenue is predominately generated from the sale of products and services to major, national, and independent oil and natural gas companies worldwide, and is dependent on spending by our customers for oil and natural gas exploration, field development and production. This spending is driven by a number of factors, including our customers' forecasts of future energy demand and supply, their access to resources to develop and produce oil and natural gas, their ability to fund their capital programs, the impact of new government regulations and most importantly, their expectations for oil and natural gas prices as a key driver of their cash flows.
Oil and natural gas prices are summarized in the table below as averages of the daily closing prices during each of the periods indicated.
(1)Energy Information Administration (EIA) Europe Brent Spot Price per Barrel(2)EIA Cushing, OK WTI (West Texas Intermediate) spot price(3)EIA Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price per million British Thermal UnitOutside North America, customer spending is most heavily influenced by Brent oil prices, which decreased from the same quarter last year, ranging from a high of $87.54/Bbl in January 2023 to a low of $71.03/Bbl in March 2023. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, Brent oil prices averaged $81.14/Bbl, which represented a decrease of $19.73/Bbl from the same period last year.In North America, customer spending is highly driven by WTI oil prices, which decreased from the same quarter last year. Overall, WTI oil prices ranged from a high of $81.62/Bbl in January 2023 to a low of $66.61/Bbl in March 2023. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, WTI oil prices averaged $76.00/Bbl, which represented a decrease of $19.18/Bbl from the same period last year.In North America, natural gas prices, as measured by the Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Price, averaged $2.62/mmBtu in the first quarter of 2023, representing a 44% decrease from the same quarter in the prior year. Throughout the quarter, Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Prices ranged from a high of $3.78/mmBtu in January 2023 to a low of $1.93/mmBtu in March 2023.
The Baker Hughes rig counts are an important business barometer for the drilling industry and its suppliers. When drilling rigs are active they consume products and services produced by the oil service industry. Rig count trends are driven by the exploration and development spending by oil and natural gas companies, which in turn is influenced by current and future price expectations for oil and natural gas. The counts may reflect the relative strength and stability of energy prices and overall market activity; however, these counts should not be solely relied on as other specific and pervasive conditions may exist that affect overall energy prices and market activity.We have been providing rig counts to the public since 1944. We gather all relevant data through our field service personnel, who obtain the necessary data from routine visits to the various rigs, customers, contractors and other outside sources as necessary. We base the classification of a well as either oil or natural gas primarily upon filings made by operators in the relevant jurisdiction. This data is then compiled and distributed to various wire services and trade associations and is published on our website. We believe the counting process and resulting data is reliable; however, it is subject to our ability to obtain accurate and timely information. Rig counts are compiled weekly for the U.S. and Canada and monthly for all international rigs. Published international rig counts do not include rigs drilling in certain locations, such as onshore China because this information is not readily available.Rigs in the U.S. and Canada are counted as active if, on the day the count is taken, the well being drilled has been started but drilling has not been completed and the well is anticipated to be of sufficient depth to be a potential consumer of our drill bits. In international areas, rigs are counted on a weekly basis and deemed active if drilling activities occurred during the majority of the week. The weekly results are then averaged for the month and published accordingly. The rig count does not include rigs that are in transit from one location to another, rigging up, being used in non-drilling activities including production testing, completion and workover, and are not expected to be significant consumers of drill bits.The rig counts are summarized in the table below as averages for each of the periods indicated.
The worldwide rig count was 1,897 for the first quarter of 2023, an increase of 15% as compared to the same period last year primarily due to an increase in North America.Within North America, the increase was primarily driven by the U.S. rig count, which was up 20% when compared to the same period last year, and an increase in the Canada rig count, which was up 11% when compared to the same period last year. Internationally, the rig count increase was driven primarily by an increase in the Europe, Latin America, and Middle East regions of 19%, 13%, and 10%, respectively.
The discussions below relating to significant line items from our condensed consolidated statements of income (loss) are based on available information and represent our analysis of significant changes or events that impact the comparability of reported amounts. Where appropriate, we have identified specific events and changes that affect comparability or trends and, where reasonably practicable, have quantified the impact of such items. In addition, the discussions below for revenue and cost of revenue are on a total basis as the business drivers for product sales and services are similar. All dollar amounts in tabulations in this section are in millions of dollars, unless otherwise stated. Certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers.Our condensed consolidated statements of income (loss) displays sales and costs of sales in accordance with SEC regulations under which "goods" is required to include all sales of tangible products and "services" must include all other sales, including other service activities. For the amounts shown below, we distinguish between "equipment" and "product services", where product services refer to sales under product services agreements, including sales of both goods (such as spare parts and equipment upgrades) and related services (such as monitoring, maintenance and repairs), which is an important part of our operations. We refer to "product services" simply as "services" within the Business Environment section of Management's Discussion and Analysis.Our results of operations are evaluated by the Chief Executive Officer on a consolidated basis as well as at the segment level. The performance of our operating segments is primarily evaluated based on segment operating income (loss), which is defined as income (loss) before income taxes and before the following: net interest expense, net other non-operating income (loss), corporate expenses, restructuring, impairment and other charges, goodwill and inventory impairments, and certain gains and losses not allocated to the operating segments.In evaluating the segment performance, the Company primarily uses the following:Volume: Volume is the increase or decrease in products and/or services sold period-over-period excluding the impact of foreign exchange and price. The volume impact on profit is calculated by multiplying the prior period profit rate by the change in revenue volume between the current and prior period. It also includes price, defined as the change in sales price for a comparable product or service period-over-period and is calculated as the period-over-period change in sales prices of comparable products and services.Foreign Exchange ("FX"): FX measures the translational foreign exchange impact, or the translation impact of the period-over-period change on sales and costs directly attributable to change in the foreign exchange rate compared to the U.S. dollar. FX impact is calculated by multiplying the functional currency amounts (revenue or profit) with the period-over-period FX rate variance, using the average exchange rate for the respective period.(Inflation)/Deflation: (Inflation)/deflation is defined as the increase or decrease in direct and indirect costs of the same type for an equal amount of volume. It is calculated as the year-over-year change in cost (i.e. price paid) of direct material, compensation and benefits and overhead costs.Productivity: Productivity is measured by the remaining variance in profit, after adjusting for the period-over-period impact of volume and price, foreign exchange and (inflation)/deflation as defined above. Improved or lower period-over-period cost productivity is the result of cost efficiencies or inefficiencies, such as cost decreasing or increasing more than volume, or cost increasing or decreasing less than volume, or changes in sales mix among segments. This also includes the period-over-period variance of transactional foreign exchange, aside from those foreign currency devaluations that are reported separately for business evaluation purposes.
Orders: For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we recognized total orders of $7.6 billion, an increase of $0.8 billion, or 12%, from the three months ended March 31, 2022.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our OFSE segment recognized orders of $4.1 billion, an increase of $0.8 billion, or 25% and our IET segment recognized orders of $3.5 billion, a decrease of $35 million, or 1% compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. Within IET, Gas Technology Equipment orders were $1.9 billion and Gas Technology Services orders were $0.7 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023.Remaining Performance Obligations ("RPO"): As of March 31, 2023, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to the unsatisfied (or partially unsatisfied) performance obligations was $29.6 billion. As of March 31, 2023, OFSE remaining performance obligations totaled $3.1 billion, and IET remaining performance obligations totaled $26.5 billion.
Summarized financial information for the Company's segments is shown in the following tables.
The following table presents Oilfield Services & Equipment revenue by geographic region:
(1)Impacted by the discontinuation of our Russia operations that occurred in 2022.  The following table presents segment operating income through to net income for the Company.
Revenue increased $881 million, or 18%, driven by increased activity in OFSE and IET. OFSE increased $560 million and IET increased $320 million. Total segment operating income increased $159 million, driven by OFSE.
OFSE revenue of $3,577 million increased $560 million, or 19%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, as a result of increased activity in North America and internationally, as evidenced by an increase in the global rig count. North America revenue was $992 million in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $169 million from the first quarter of 2022. International revenue was $2,586 million in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $392 million from the first quarter of 2022, driven by the Latin America and Middle East/Asia regions, partially offset by declines in the Europe/CIS/Sub-Saharan Africa region, driven by lower Russia volume.OFSE segment operating income was $371 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $213 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in operating income was primarily driven by higher volume and price, partially offset by cost inflation and unfavorable cost productivity.
IET revenue of $2,138 million increased $320 million, or 18%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022. The increase was primarily driven by higher volume in Gas Technology Equipment and, to a lesser extent, in Gas Technology Services and Industrial Technology, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency translation impact.IET segment operating income was $241 million in the first quarter of 2023, flat when compared to the first quarter of 2022. The operating income performance in the first quarter of 2023 was driven by higher volume and pricing actions in certain product lines, offset by inflationary pressure, unfavorable business mix, higher research and development costs related to new energy investments, and unfavorable foreign currency translation impact.
In the first quarter of 2023, corporate expenses were $100 million compared to $105 million in the first quarter of 2022. The decrease of $5 million was driven by cost efficiencies.
In the first quarter of 2023, we recorded inventory impairments of $18 million, predominately in our OFSE segment. Charges for inventory impairments are reported in the "Cost of goods sold" caption in the condensed consolidated statements of income (loss).
In the first quarter of 2023, we recognized $56 million of restructuring, impairment, and other charges, compared to $70 million in the first quarter of 2022. In the third quarter of 2022, we announced a restructuring plan in conjunction with a change in our operating segments. As a result, we continued to incur charges in the first quarter of 2023 primarily related to employee termination expenses driven by actions taken to facilitate the reorganization into two segments. In addition, costs were incurred related to exit activities at specific locations in our segments to align with our current market outlook and to rationalize our manufacturing supply chain footprint. The charges in the first quarter of 2022 primarily related to our IET segment for a write-off of an equity method investment and the release of foreign currency translation adjustments for certain restructured product lines.
In the first quarter of 2023, we incurred $386 million of other non-operating income. Included in this amount was a gain of $392 million from the change in fair value for certain equity investments. For the first quarter of 2022, we incurred $28 million of other non-operating losses. Included in this amount was a gain of $11 million from the change in fair value for certain equity investments.
In the first quarter of 2023, we incurred interest expense, net of interest income, of $64 million, which was flat compared to the first quarter of 2022.
In the first quarter of 2023, the provision for income taxes was $179 million. The difference between the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21% and the effective tax rate is primarily related to income in jurisdictions with tax rates higher than in the U.S., which is partially offset by income subject to U.S. tax at an effective rate less than 21% due to valuation allowances.In the first quarter of 2022, the provision for income taxes was $107 million. The difference between the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21% and the effective tax rate is primarily related to losses with no tax benefit due to valuation allowances and income in jurisdictions with tax rates higher than the U.S., partially offset by tax benefits related to uncertain tax positions.
Our objective in financing our business is to maintain sufficient liquidity, adequate financial resources and financial flexibility in order to fund the requirements of our business. We continue to maintain solid financial strength and liquidity. At March 31, 2023, we had cash and cash equivalents of $2.4 billion compared to $2.5 billion at December 31, 2022.In the U.S. we held cash and cash equivalents of approximately $0.7 billion and $0.6 billion and outside the U.S. of approximately $1.7 billion and $1.9 billion as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. A substantial portion of the cash held outside the U.S. at March 31, 2023 has been reinvested in active non-U.S. business operations. If we decide at a later date to repatriate those funds to the U.S., we may incur other additional taxes that would not be significant to the total tax provision.We have a $3 billion committed unsecured revolving credit facility ("the Credit Agreement") with commercial banks maturing in December 2024. The Credit Agreement contains certain customary representations and warranties, certain customary affirmative covenants and certain customary negative covenants. Upon the occurrence of certain events of default, our obligations under the Credit Agreement may be accelerated. Such events of default include payment defaults to lenders under the Credit Agreement and other customary defaults. No such events of default have occurred. In addition, we have a commercial paper program with authorization up to $3 billion under which we may issue from time to time commercial paper with maturities of no more than 397 days. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, there were no borrowings under either the Credit Agreement or the commercial paper program.Certain Senior Notes contain covenants that restrict our ability to take certain actions. See "Note 8. Debt" of the Notes to Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in this Quarterly Report for further details. At March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all debt covenants. Our next debt maturity is December 2023.We continuously review our liquidity and capital resources. If market conditions were to change, for instance due to the uncertainty created by geopolitical events, a global pandemic or a significant decline in oil and gas prices, and our revenue was reduced significantly or operating costs were to increase significantly, our cash flows and liquidity could be negatively impacted. Additionally, it could cause the rating agencies to lower our credit ratings. There are no ratings triggers that would accelerate the maturity of any borrowings under our committed credit facility; however, a downgrade in our credit ratings could increase the cost of borrowings under the credit facility and could also limit or preclude our ability to issue commercial paper. Should this occur, we could seek alternative sources of funding, including borrowing under the credit facility.During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we dispersed cash to fund a variety of activities including certain working capital needs, capital expenditures, and the payment of dividends.
Cash flows provided by (used in) each type of activity were as follows for the three months ended March 31:
Cash flows from operating activities generated cash of $461 million and $72 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.Our largest source of operating cash is payments from customers, of which the largest component is collecting cash related to our sales of products and services including advance payments or progress collections for work to be performed. The primary use of operating cash is to pay our suppliers, employees, tax authorities, and others for a wide range of goods and services.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, cash generated from operating activities were primarily driven by net income adjusted for certain noncash items (including depreciation, amortization, gain on equity securities, stock-based compensation cost, deferred tax provision, and the impairment of certain assets). Net working capital cash usage was $63 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, mainly due to the increase in receivables, and inventory as we continue to build for revenue growth, partially offset by strong progress collections on equipment contracts.For the three months ended March 31, 2022, cash generated from operating activities were primarily driven by net income adjusted for certain noncash items (including depreciation, amortization, gain on equity securities, stock-based compensation costs, and deferred tax provision). Net working capital cash usage was $93 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022, mainly due to the increase in receivables, driven primarily by lower collections, and inventory as we built for revenue growth, partially offset by strong progress collections on equipment contracts.
Cash flows from investing activities used cash of $229 million and $266 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.Our principal recurring investing activity is the funding of capital expenditures including property, plant and equipment and software, to support and generate revenue from operations. Expenditures for capital assets were $310 million and $268 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, partially offset by cash flows from the sale of property, plant and equipment ("PP&E") of $46 million and $91 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Proceeds from the disposal of assets are primarily related to equipment that was lost-in-hole, predominantly in OFSE, and to PP&E no longer used in operations that was sold throughout the period.
Cash flows from financing activities used cash of $250 million and $469 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.We paid dividends of $192 million and $172 million to our Class A shareholders during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.There were no shares of Class A common stock or LLC Units repurchased during the three months ended March 31, 2023. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the Company and BHH LLC repurchased and canceled 8.1 million shares of Class A common stock and LLC Units, respectively, for a total of $236 million. As of March 31, 2023, the Company and BHH LLC had authorization remaining to repurchase up to approximately $2.8 billion of its Class A common stock and LLC Units, respectively.
We believe cash on hand, cash flows from operating activities, the available revolving credit facility, access to both our commercial paper program or our uncommitted lines of credit, and availability under our existing shelf registrations of debt will provide us with sufficient capital resources and liquidity in the short-term and long-term to manage our working capital needs, meet contractual obligations, fund capital expenditures and dividends, repay debt, repurchase our common stock, and support the development of our short-term and long-term operating strategies. When necessary, we issue commercial paper or other short-term debt to fund cash needs in the U.S. in excess of the cash generated in the U.S.Our capital expenditures can be adjusted and managed by us to match market demand and activity levels. We continue to believe that based on current market conditions, capital expenditures in 2023 are expected to be made at a rate that would equal up to 5% of annual revenue. The expenditures are expected to be used primarily for normal, recurring items necessary to support our business. We currently anticipate making income tax payments in the range of $500 million to $550 million in 2023.
Customer receivables: In line with industry practice, we may bill our customers for services provided in arrears dependent upon contractual terms. In a challenging economic environment, we may experience delays in the payment of our invoices due to customers' lower cash flow from operations or their more limited access to credit markets. While historically there have not been material non-payment events, we attempt to mitigate this risk through working with our customers to restructure their debts. A customer's failure or delay in payment could have a material adverse effect on our short-term liquidity and results of operations. Our gross customer receivables in the U.S. were 16% and in Mexico 13% as of March 31, 2023. No other country accounted for more than 10% of our gross customer receivables at this date.International operations: Our cash that is held outside the U.S. is 73% of the total cash balance as of March 31, 2023. We may not be able to use this cash quickly and efficiently due to exchange or cash controls that could make it challenging. As a result, our cash balance may not represent our ability to quickly and efficiently use this cash.
Our critical accounting estimation processes are consistent with those described in Item 7 of Part II, "Management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations" of our 2022 Annual Report.
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, (each a "forward-looking statement"). All statements, other than historical facts, including statements regarding the presentation of the Company's operations in future reports and any assumptions underlying any of the foregoing, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements concern future circumstances and results and other statements that are not historical facts and are sometimes identified by the words "may," "will," "should," "potential," "intend," "expect," "would," "seek," "anticipate," "estimate," "overestimate," "underestimate," "believe," "could," "project," "predict," "continue," "target", "goal" or other similar words or expressions. Forward-looking statements are based upon current plans, estimates and expectations that are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those indicated or anticipated by such forward-looking statements. The inclusion of such statements should not be regarded as a representation that such plans, estimates or expectations will be achieved. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from such plans, estimates or expectations include, among others, the risk factors identified in the "Risk Factors" section of Part II of Item 1A of this report and Part 1 of Item 1A of our 2022 Annual Report and those set forth from time-to-time in other filings by the Company with the SEC. These documents are available through our website or through the SEC's Electronic Data Gathering and Analysis Retrieval (EDGAR) system at http://www.sec.gov.Any forward-looking statements speak only as of the date of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. The Company does not undertake any obligation to update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information or developments, future events or otherwise, except as required by law. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on any of these forward-looking statements.