
BorgWarner Inc. and Consolidated Subsidiaries (the “Company” or “BorgWarner”) is a global product leader in clean and efficient technology solutions for combustion, hybrid and electric vehicles. BorgWarner’s products help improve vehicle performance, propulsion efficiency, stability and air quality. The Company manufactures and sells these products worldwide, primarily to original equipment manufacturers (“OEMs”) of light vehicles (passenger cars, sport-utility vehicles (“SUVs”), vans and light trucks). The Company’s products are also sold to other OEMs of commercial vehicles (medium-duty trucks, heavy-duty trucks and buses) and off-highway vehicles (agricultural and construction machinery and marine applications). The Company also manufactures and sells its products to certain tier one vehicle systems suppliers and into the aftermarket for light, commercial and off-highway vehicles. The Company operates manufacturing facilities serving customers in Europe, the Americas and Asia and is an original equipment supplier to nearly every major automotive OEM in the world.
In 2021, the Company announced its strategy to aggressively grow its electrification product portfolio over time through organic investments and technology-focused acquisitions. The Company believes it is well positioned for the industry’s anticipated migration to electric vehicles (“EV”). The Company is targeting its revenue from products for pure electric vehicles to be over 25% of its total revenue in 2025 and approximately 45% of its total revenue in 2030. The Company believes it is on track to exceed its 2025 organic EV-related sales target. Based on new business awards and acquisitions completed to date, the Company believes it is on track to achieve $4.3 billion of EV-related revenue in 2025. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company’s EV-related revenue was approximately $270 million, or 6%, of its total revenue. On December 6, 2022, the Company announced its intention to execute a tax-free spin-off of its Fuel Systems and Aftermarket segments into a separate, publicly traded company. The intended separation of its Fuel Systems and Aftermarket segments would support optimizing the Company’s combustion portfolio and advancing its electrification journey, while at the same time creating a new, focused company that would be able to pursue growth opportunities in alternative fuels, such as hydrogen, and in Aftermarket. The Company expects to complete the transaction by the end of the third quarter of 2023, subject to satisfaction of customary conditions.
On March 1, 2023, the Company completed its acquisition of the electric vehicle solution, smart grid and smart energy businesses (“SSE”) of Hubei Surpass Sun Electric, pursuant to an Equity Transfer Agreement. The acquisition complements the Company’s existing European and North American charging footprint by adding a presence in China. The total consideration is ¥288 million ($42 million), including ¥268 million ($39 million) of base purchase price and ¥20 million ($3 million) of estimated earn-out payments. The Company paid ¥129 million ($19 million) of the base purchase price in the three months ended March 31, 2023. The remaining ¥139 million ($20 million) of base purchase price is payable in two installments with the last payment due before March 31, 2025. In addition, pursuant to the agreement, the Company could be obligated to remit up to ¥103 million ($15 million), in the form of contingent payments over approximately two years following the closing.
On December 1, 2022, the Company acquired Drivetek AG (“Drivetek”), an engineering and product development company located in Switzerland. This acquisition strengthens the Company’s power electronics capabilities in auxiliary inverters, which the Company expects will accelerate the growth of its High Voltage eFan business. The Company paid ₣27 million ($29 million) at closing, and up to ₣10 million ($10 million) could be paid in the form of contingent earn-out payments over three years following the closing.
On July 29, 2022, the Company acquired Rhombus Energy Solutions (“Rhombus”), a provider of charging solutions in the North American market. The acquisition complements the Company’s existing European charging footprint to accelerate organic growth and adds North American regional presence to its charging business. The Company paid $131 million at closing, and up to $30 million could be paid in the form of contingent payments over three years following the closing.
On March 31, 2022, the Company acquired Santroll Automotive Components (“Santroll”), a carve-out of Santroll Electric Auto’s eMotor business. The acquisition is expected to strengthen the Company’s vertical integration, scale and portfolio breadth in light vehicle eMotors while allowing for increased speed to market. The total final consideration was $192 million. The consideration includes approximately ¥1.0 billion ($152 million) of base purchase price and ¥0.25 billion ($40 million) of originally estimated earn-out payments. The Company paid approximately ¥1.0 billion ($157 million) of base purchase price in the year ended December 31, 2022 and expects to recapture approximately $5 million of post-closing adjustments through a reduction of the second earn-out payment. As of March 31, 2023, the Company’s estimate of the earn-out payments was approximately ¥0.2 billion ($24 million), or $19 million net of the post-closing adjustments noted above. This liability is recorded in Other current liabilities in the Company’s Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheet. Refer to Note 3, “Acquisitions,” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of this report for more information.
Commodities and Other Inflationary Impacts. Prices for commodities remain volatile, and since the beginning of 2021, the Company has experienced price increases for base metals (e.g., steel, aluminum and nickel), precious metals (e.g., palladium), and raw materials that are primarily used in batteries for electric vehicles (e.g., lithium and cobalt). In addition, most global economies where the Company operates are experiencing elevated levels of inflation more generally, which is driving an increase in other input costs. As a result, the Company has experienced, and is continuing to experience, higher costs.
The Company expects global industry production to be flat to a modest increase year over year in 2023. The Company also expects net new business-related sales growth, due to the increased penetration of BorgWarner products and increasing electric vehicle revenue, to drive a sales increase in excess of the growth in industry production outlook. Recoveries from the Company’s customers of material cost inflation arising from non-contractual commercial negotiations with those customers are also expected to increase net sales year over year. As a result, the Company expects increased revenue in 2023, excluding the impact of foreign currencies.The Company expects the earnings benefit of this revenue growth to be partially offset by a planned increase in electrification-related Research & Development (“R&D”) expenditures during 2023. This planned R&D increase is to support growth in the Company’s electric vehicle-related products and is primarily related to supporting the launch of awarded programs.The Company maintains a positive long-term outlook for its global business and is committed to new product development and strategic investments to enhance its product leadership strategy. There are several trends that are driving the Company’s long-term growth that management expects to continue, including adoption of product offerings for electrified vehicles and increasingly stringent global emissions standards that support demand for the Company’s products driving vehicle efficiency.
The following table presents a summary of our operating results:
Net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 totaled $4,180 million, an increase of $306 million, or 8%, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The change in net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by the following:•Favorable volume, mix and net new business increased sales approximately $398 million, or 10%. This increase was primarily driven by higher weighted average market production as estimated by the Company, which was up approximately 7% from the three months ended March 31, 2022. The remaining increase primarily reflects sales growth above market production, which the Company believes reflects higher demand for its products. Weighted average market production reflects light and commercial vehicle production as reported by IHS weighed for the Company’s geographic exposure, as estimated by the Company.•Fluctuations in foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in sales of approximately $162 million primarily due to the weakening of the Euro, Chinese Renminbi and Korean Won relative to the U.S. Dollar.•Recoveries from the Company’s customers of material cost inflation arising from non-contractual commercial negotiations with those customers and normal contractual customer commodity pass-through arrangements increased net sales by approximately $48 million.•Acquisitions contributed $22 million in additional sales during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
Cost of sales and cost of sales as a percentage of net sales were $3,430 million and 82.1%, respectively, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $3,124 million and 80.6%, respectively, during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The change in cost of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by the following:•Higher sales volume, mix and net new business increased cost of sales by approximately $329 million.•Fluctuations in foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in cost of sales of approximately $129 million primarily due to the weakening of the Euro, Chinese Renminbi and Korean Won relative to the U.S. Dollar.•Cost of sales was also impacted by material cost inflation of approximately $76 million arising from non-contractual commercial negotiations with the Company’s suppliers and normal contractual supplier commodity pass-through arrangements. Gross profit and gross margin were $750 million and 17.9%, respectively, during the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to $750 million and 19.4%, respectively, during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease in gross margin was primarily due to the factors discussed above.
SG&A for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $384 million as compared to $388 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. SG&A as a percentage of net sales was 9.2% and 10.0% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The change in SG&A was primarily attributable to:•Research and Development (“R&D”) costs remained relatively flat. R&D costs, net of customer reimbursements, were 4.6% of net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 4.9% of net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Company will continue to invest in R&D programs, which are necessary to support short- and long-term growth. The Company’s current long-term expectation for R&D spending is in the range of 5.0% to 5.5% of net sales.•Decreased administrative expenses of $7 million, primarily related to IT and professional fees.Restructuring expense was $7 million and $15 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, primarily related to employee benefit costs. Refer to Note 5 “Restructuring” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of this report for more information.In February 2020, the Company announced a $300 million restructuring plan to address existing structural costs. During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, the Company recorded $3 million and $13 million of restructuring expense related to this plan, respectively. Cumulatively, the Company has incurred $290 million of restructuring charges related to this plan. The actions under this plan are substantially complete. The resulting annual gross savings are expected to be in excess of $100 million and are being utilized to sustain overall operating margin profile and cost competitiveness.Other operating expense (income), net was expense of $19 million and income of $5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company recorded merger, acquisition and divestiture expense, net of $22 million primarily related to professional fees associated with the intended separation of its Fuel Systems and Aftermarket segments and other specific acquisition and disposition initiatives. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the Company recorded merger, acquisition and divestiture expense, net of $23 million primarily related to professional fees associated with specific acquisition and disposition initiatives. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the Company recorded a pre-tax gain of $24 million in connection with the sale of its interest in BorgWarner Romeo Power LLC (“Romeo JV”), in which the Company owned a 60% interest. Refer to Note 3, “Acquisitions,” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.Other operating expense, net is primarily comprised of items included within the subtitle “Non-comparable items impacting the Company’s earnings per diluted share and net earnings” below.Equity in affiliates’ earnings, net of tax was $4 million and $8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. This line item is driven by the results of the Company’s unconsolidated joint ventures.Unrealized loss on debt and equity securities was $15 million and $39 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. This line item reflects the net unrealized gains or losses recognized due to valuing the Company’s investments at fair value. The amount recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2023 is primarily related to an unrealized loss recognized on debt securities. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the Company recorded a loss and sold all of its remaining investment in Romeo Power, Inc. Refer to Note 3, “Acquisitions,” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.Interest expense, net was $10 million and $15 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. This decrease was primarily due to higher interest rates on cash and cash equivalents balances and interest income on debt securities.Provision for income taxes was $87 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, resulting in an effective rate of 27%. This is compared to $91 million, an effective rate of 29%, for the three months ended March 31, 2022. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, a discrete tax benefit of approximately $13 million was recorded related to the resolution of tax audits, and a $10 million discrete tax expense was recorded for the impact of enacted tax law changes.
The Company’s earnings per diluted share were $0.93 and $0.84 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The non-comparable items presented below are calculated after tax using the corresponding effective tax rate discrete to each item and the weighted average number of diluted shares for each of the periods then ended. The Company believes the following table is useful in highlighting non-comparable items that impacted its earnings per diluted share:
The Company’s business is aggregated into five reporting segments: Air Management, Drivetrain & Battery Systems, Fuel Systems, ePropulsion and Aftermarket. These segments are strategic business groups that are managed separately as each represents a specific grouping of related automotive components and systems.In the first quarter of 2023, the Company elected to disaggregate the former e-Propulsion & Drivetrain reporting segment into two separate reporting segments of Drivetrain & Battery Systems and ePropulsion. The Drivetrain & Battery Systems segment’s technologies include battery management systems and control modules, software, friction and mechanical products for automatic transmissions and torque-management products. The ePropulsion segment primarily includes rotating electrical components, power electronics, inverters and electric motors.In the first quarter of 2022, the Company announced that the Americas starter and alternator business, previously reported in its former e-Propulsion & Drivetrain segment, would transition to the Aftermarket segment. The Company also announced in 2022 that the canisters and fuel delivery modules business, previously reported in its Air Management segment, would transition to the Fuel Systems segment. Both of these transitions were completed during the second quarter of 2022. Additionally, in the fourth quarter of 2022, the Company moved its battery systems business, previously reported in its Air Management segment, to the former e-Propulsion & Drivetrain segment.The reporting segment disclosures have been updated accordingly, including recasting prior period information for the new reporting structures.Segment Adjusted Operating Income (Loss) is the measure of segment income or loss used by the Company. Segment Adjusted Operating Income (Loss) is comprised of operating income adjusted for restructuring, merger, acquisition and divestiture expense, intangible asset amortization expense, impairment charges and other items not reflective of ongoing operating income or loss. The Company believes Segment Adjusted Operating Income (Loss) is most reflective of the operational profitability or loss of our reporting segments. Segment Adjusted Operating Margin is the Segment Adjusted Operating Income (Loss) divided by net sales of the reporting segment.The following tables presents net sales and Segment Adjusted Operating Income (Loss) for the Company’s reporting segments:
The Air Management segment’s net sales increased $211 million, or 12%, and Segment Adjusted Operating Income increased $34 million from the three months ended March 31, 2022. Foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in sales of approximately $81 million primarily due to the weakening of the Euro, Chinese Renminbi, and Korean Won relative to the U.S. Dollar. The increase excluding the impact of foreign currencies was primarily due to approximately $255 million of volume, mix and net new business driven by increased demand for the Company’s products and higher weighted average market production compared to the prior year and approximately $30 million from non-contractual commercial negotiations with the Company’s customers and normal contractual customer commodity pass-through arrangements. Segment Adjusted Operating Margin was 14.4% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 14.2% during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Segment Adjusted Operating Margin increase was primarily due to higher revenue and reduced R&D investments, partially offset by inflationary impacts on costs.The Drivetrain & Battery Systems segment’s net sales increased $60 million, or 7%, and Segment Adjusted Operating Income decreased $3 million from the three months ended March 31, 2022. Foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in sales of approximately $32 million primarily due to the weakening of the Chinese Renminbi and Euro relative to the U.S. Dollar. The increase excluding the impact of foreign currencies was primarily due to approximately $89 million of volume, mix and net new business driven by increased demand for the Company’s battery systems and higher weighted average market production compared to the prior year in North America and Europe, which was partially offset by the impact of lower market production in China. Segment Adjusted Operating Margin was 11.5% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 12.6% during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Segment Adjusted Operating Margin decrease was primarily due to product mix and increased investments in R&D for electrification products.The Fuel Systems segment’s net sales decreased $23 million, or 4%, and Segment Adjusted Operating Income decreased $18 million from the three months ended March 31, 2022. Foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in sales of approximately $24 million primarily due to the weakening of the Chinese Renminbi, British Pound, and Euro relative to the U.S. Dollar. Segment Adjusted Operating Margin was 8.5% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 11.2% during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Segment Adjusted Operating Margin decrease was primarily due to product mix, higher supplier-related costs and higher net R&D expenditures.The ePropulsion segment’s net sales increased $47 million, or 11%, and Segment Adjusted Operating Loss increased $17 million from the three months ended March 31, 2022. Foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in sales of approximately $19 million primarily due to the weakening of the Chinese Renminbi relative to the U.S. Dollar. Acquisitions contributed $20 million in additional sales during the three months ended March 31, 2023. The increase excluding these items was primarily due to approximately $23 million of volume, mix and net new business driven by increased demand for the Company’s products and higher weighted average market production compared to the prior year and approximately $12 million from non-contractual commercial negotiations with the Company’s customers and normal contractual customer commodity pass-through arrangements. Segment Adjusted Operating Margin was (7.0)% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to (3.9)% during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Segment Adjusted Operating Loss is primarily due to investments in R&D for electrification products. The Segment Adjusted Operating Margin decrease was due to a planned increase in R&D for electrification products.The Aftermarket segment’s net sales increased $23 million, or 7%, and Segment Adjusted Operating Income increased $6 million from the three months ended March 31, 2022. Foreign currencies resulted in a year-over-year decrease in sales of approximately $6 million primarily due to the weakening of the Euro relative to the U.S. Dollar. The increase excluding the impact of foreign currencies was primarily due to approximately $26 million of volume, mix and net new business driven by increased demand for the Company’s products and approximately $5 million of pricing. Segment Adjusted Operating Margin was 13.6% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 12.7% during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Segment Adjusted Operating Margin increase was primarily due to higher revenue and increased pricing.
The Company maintains various liquidity sources, including cash and cash equivalents and the unused portion of its multi-currency revolving credit agreement. As of March 31, 2023, the Company had liquidity of $2,950 million, comprised of cash and cash equivalent balances of $950 million and an undrawn revolving credit facility of $2,000 million. The Company was in full compliance with its covenants under the revolving credit facility and had full access to its undrawn revolving credit facility. Given the Company’s strong liquidity position, management believes that it will have sufficient liquidity and will maintain compliance with all covenants through at least the next 12 months.As of March 31, 2023, cash balances of $861 million were held by the Company’s subsidiaries outside the United States. Cash and cash equivalents held by these subsidiaries are used to fund foreign operational activities and future investments, including acquisitions. The majority of cash held outside the United States is available for repatriation. The Company uses its U.S. liquidity primarily for various corporate purposes, including but not limited to debt service, share repurchases, dividend distributions, acquisitions and other corporate expenses.The Company has a $2.0 billion multi-currency revolving credit facility that includes a feature allowing the Company the ability to increase the facility by $1.0 billion with bank group approval. This facility matures in March 2025. The credit facility agreement contains customary events of default and one key financial covenant, which is a debt-to-EBITDA (Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization) ratio. The Company was in compliance with the financial covenant at March 31, 2023. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under this facility.The Company’s commercial paper program allows the Company to issue up to $2.0 billion of short-term, unsecured commercial paper notes under the limits of its multi-currency revolving credit facility. Under this program, the Company may issue notes from time to time and use the proceeds for general corporate purposes. The Company had no outstanding borrowings under this program as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.The total current combined borrowing capacity under the multi-currency revolving credit facility and commercial paper program cannot exceed $2.0 billion. In addition to the revolving credit facility, the Company’s universal shelf registration provides the ability to issue various debt and equity instruments subject to market conditions. On February 8, 2023 and April 26, 2023 the Company’s Board of Directors declared quarterly cash dividends of $0.17 per share of common stock. The dividends declared in the first quarter were paid on March 15, 2023, and the dividends declared in the second quarter will be paid on June 15, 2023.From a credit quality perspective, the Company has a credit rating of BBB+ from Fitch Ratings, BBB from Standard & Poor's and Baa1 from Moody's. The current outlook from each of Fitch, Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s is stable. None of the Company's debt agreements require accelerated repayment in the event of a downgrade in credit ratings.
Net cash used in operating activities was $12 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $116 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily due to increased working capital investments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $282 million during the first three months of 2023 compared to $254 million during the first three months of 2022. In the first quarter of 2023, the Company acquired the electric vehicle solution, smart grid and smart energy businesses of Hubei Surpass Sun Electric. As a percentage of sales, capital expenditures were 6.7% and 4.6% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase in capital expenditures is to support the planned growth of electrification products.
Net cash used in financing activities was $90 million during the first three months of 2023 compared to $195 million during the first three months of 2022. Net cash used in financing activities during the first three months of 2023 was primarily related to the $39 million in dividends paid to the Company’s stockholders, $25 million in dividends paid to noncontrolling stockholders of the Company’s consolidated joint ventures and $25 million in stock-based compensation items.
In the normal course of business, the Company is party to various commercial and legal claims, actions and complaints, including matters involving warranty claims, intellectual property claims, general liability and other risks. It is not possible to predict with certainty whether or not the Company will ultimately be successful in any of these commercial and legal matters or, if not, what the impact might be. The Company’s management does not believe that adverse outcomes in any of these commercial and legal claims, actions and complaints are reasonably likely to have a material adverse effect on the Company’s results of operations, financial position or cash flows. An adverse outcome could, nonetheless, be material to the results of operations or cash flows.
The Company and certain of its current and former direct and indirect corporate predecessors, subsidiaries and divisions have been identified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and certain state environmental agencies and private parties as potentially responsible parties (“PRPs”) at various hazardous waste disposal sites under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (“Superfund”) and equivalent state laws and, as such, may be presently liable for the cost of clean-up and other remedial activities at 26 such sites as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. Responsibility for clean-up and other remedial activities at a Superfund site is typically shared among PRPs based on an allocation formula.The Company believes that none of these matters, individually or in the aggregate, will have a material adverse effect on its results of operations, financial position or cash flows. Generally, this is because either the estimates of the maximum potential liability at a site are not material or the liability will be shared with other PRPs, although no assurance can be given with respect to the ultimate outcome of any such matter. Refer to Note 20, “Contingencies,” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of this report for further details and information respecting the Company’s environmental liability.
Refer to Note 2, “New Accounting Pronouncements,” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of this report for a detailed description of new applicable accounting pronouncements.