
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to provide information that will assist the reader in understanding the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements between select periods and the primary factors that accounted for those changes.  In addition, we discuss how certain accounting principles, policies and critical estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our discussion also contains certain forward-looking statements related to future events and expectations as well as a discussion of the many factors that we believe may have an impact on our business on an ongoing basis. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with our discussion of cautionary statements and significant risks to the company’s business under Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of the 2022 Form 10-K.
•Total sales and revenues for the first quarter of 2023 were $15.862 billion, an increase of $2.273 billion, or 17 percent, compared with $13.589 billion in the first quarter of 2022. Sales were higher across the three primary segments. •Operating profit margin was 17.2 percent for the first quarter of 2023, compared with 13.7 percent for the first quarter of 2022. Adjusted operating profit margin was 21.1 percent for the first quarter of 2023, compared with 13.7 percent for the first quarter of 2022.•First-quarter 2023 profit per share was $3.74, and excluding the items in the table below, adjusted profit per share was $4.91. First-quarter 2022 profit per share was $2.86, and excluding the items in the table below, adjusted profit per share was $2.88. •Caterpillar ended the first quarter of 2023 with $6.8 billion of enterprise cash. •Enterprise operating cash flow was $1.6 billion in the first quarter of 2023.•In order for our results to be more meaningful to our readers, we have separately quantified the impact of several significant items. A detailed reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP financial measures is included on page 55.
Total sales and revenues for the first quarter of 2023 were $15.862 billion, an increase of $2.273 billion, or 17 percent, compared with $13.589 billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume, partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts primarily related to the euro, Japanese yen and Australian dollar. The increase in sales volume was driven by higher sales of equipment to end users, partially offset by lower services volume. Sales were higher across the three primary segments.First-quarter 2023 profit per share was $3.74, compared with $2.86 profit per share in the first quarter of 2022. In the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, profit per share included restructuring costs. First-quarter 2023 restructuring costs included the impact of the divestiture of the company's Longwall business. Profit for the first quarter of 2023 was $1.943 billion, an increase of $406 million, or 26 percent compared with $1.537 billion for the first quarter of 2022. The increase was primarily due to favorable price realization, higher sales volume and higher investment and interest income, partially offset by the impact of the divestiture of the company's Longwall business, higher manufacturing costs and unfavorable impacts from foreign currency exchange, commodity hedges and pension and other postemployment benefit (OPEB) plan costs.
In Construction Industries, we see positive momentum in 2023 for North America. We expect non-residential construction in North America to grow due to the positive impact of government-related infrastructure investments and a healthy pipeline of construction projects. Although residential construction housing starts have softened, the growth rate of our residential construction equipment remains positive as the supply chain pressures alleviate. In Asia Pacific, excluding China, we expect growth due to public infrastructure spending and supportive commodity prices. We expect continued weakness in China in the excavator industry above 10-tons, which we anticipate to remain below 2022 levels due to low construction activity. In EAME, business activity is now expected increase versus 2022 based on healthy construction project activity, particularly strong construction demand in the Middle East. Although uncertain economic conditions remain in Europe, it is more resilient than we previously anticipated. Construction activity in Latin America is expected to be slightly down versus a strong 2022 performance. In Resource Industries, we expect healthy mining demand to continue as commodity prices remain above investment thresholds; however, customers continue to remain capital disciplined. We anticipate production and utilization levels will remain elevated. We expect the aging of the fleet and a lower level of parked trucks to support future demand for our equipment and services. The energy transition is expected to support increased commodity demand, expanding our total addressable market and providing opportunities for long-term profitable growth. In heavy construction and quarry and aggregates, we anticipate continued growth supported by infrastructure and major non-residential construction projects. In Energy & Transportation, we expect sales growth to follow our normal seasonal pattern with higher sales in the second half of 2023 versus the first half of 2023. In Oil & Gas reciprocating engines, although customers remain disciplined, we are encouraged by continued strength in demand for both well servicing and gas compression. Power Generation reciprocating engine demand is expected to remain healthy, including data center strength. New equipment orders and services for turbines and turbine-related services in both Oil & Gas and Power Generation are robust. Industrial remains healthy. In Transportation, we anticipate strength in high-speed marine as customers continue to upgrade aging fleets.
For the full-year 2023, we expect a strong top line supported by price realization and higher sales of equipment to end users. We do not anticipate a significant change in dealer inventory at year-end 2023 versus year-end 2022. The environment remains positive with improving supply chain dynamics, a strong backlog and healthy underlying end markets. We expect higher sales in the second quarter of 2023, compared to the second quarter of 2022 on strong sales of equipment to end users and favorable price realization. Following typical seasonality, we expect higher sales in the second quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2023. In the second quarter of 2022, we saw a decrease in dealer inventory of $400 million. We expect a smaller decrease in the second quarter of 2023. We expect operating profit to increase in 2023, compared to 2022. We expect price realization to continue to be favorable in 2023.  Throughout 2023, we expect to see moderation of price realization and input cost inflation. Increases in selling, general and administrative (SG&A) and research and development (R&D) expenses are expected throughout 2023 as we continue to invest in strategic initiatives such as services growth and technology, including digital, electrification and autonomy. We continue to anticipate higher pension expense within other income (expense) in 2023, compared to 2022, due to higher interest costs from higher interest rates. The change is estimated to be just over $300 million for the full year as compared to 2022, or about $80 million per quarter. Second quarter 2023 operating profit is expected to be substantially stronger than the second quarter of 2022 on favorable price realization and sales volume. We expect the year-over-year benefit of price realization in the second quarter of 2023 to moderate compared to the benefit we saw in the first quarter of 2023 as we lap prior price year increases.
We continue to monitor a variety of external factors around the world, such as supply chain disruptions, inflationary cost and labor pressures. Areas of particular focus include certain components, transportation and raw materials. Transportation shortages have resulted in delays and increased costs. In addition, our suppliers are dealing with availability issues and freight delays, which could impact production in our facilities. Contingency plans have been developed and continue to be modified to minimize supply chain challenges that may impact our ability to meet increasing customer demand. We continue to assess the environment and are taking appropriate price actions in response to rising costs.
Risk factors are disclosed within Item 1A. Risk Factors of the 2022 Form 10-K.
•Glossary of terms is included on pages 49 - 51; first occurrence of terms shown in bold italics.•Information on non-GAAP financial measures is included on page 55.•Certain amounts may not add due to rounding.
The chart above graphically illustrates reasons for the change in consolidated sales and revenues between the first quarter of 2022 (at left) and the first quarter of 2023 (at right). Caterpillar management utilizes these charts internally to visually communicate with the company’s board of directors and employees.Total sales and revenues for the first quarter of 2023 were $15.862 billion, an increase of $2.273 billion, or 17 percent, compared with $13.589 billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume, partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts primarily related to the euro, Japanese yen and Australian dollar. The increase in sales volume was driven by higher sales of equipment to end users, partially offset by lower services sales volume.Sales were higher across the three primary segments.North America sales increased 32 percent due to favorable price realization, higher sales of equipment to end users and the impact from changes in dealer inventories, partially offset by lower services sales volume. Dealer inventory increased more during the first quarter of 2023 than during the first quarter of 2022.Sales increased 9 percent in Latin America due to favorable price realization, partially offset by the impact from changes in dealer inventories. Dealer inventory increased during the first quarter of 2022, compared with a decrease during the first quarter of 2023.EAME sales increased 9 percent due to higher sales of equipment to end users and favorable price realization, partially offset by the impact from changes in dealer inventories, unfavorable currency impacts, primarily related to the euro and British pound, and lower services sales volume. Dealer inventory increased more during the first quarter of 2022 than during the first quarter of 2023.Asia/Pacific sales increased 2 percent driven by favorable price realization and higher services sales volume, partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts, related to the Japanese yen, Australian dollar and Chinese yuan, the impact from changes in dealer inventories and lower sales of equipment to end users. Dealer inventory increased more during the first quarter of 2022 than the first quarter of 2023.Dealer inventory increased by $1.4 billion during the first quarter of 2023, compared with an increase of $1.3 billion during the first quarter of 2022. Dealers are independent, and the reasons for changes in their inventory levels vary, including their expectations of future demand and product delivery times. Dealers’ demand expectations take into account seasonal changes, macroeconomic conditions, machine rentals and other factors. Delivery times can vary based on availability of product from Caterpillar factories and product distribution centers. We expect dealer inventories to be about flat in 2023 compared to 2022.
1 Includes revenues from Machinery, Energy & Transportation of $162 million and $100 million in the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively.
The chart above graphically illustrates reasons for the change in consolidated operating profit between the first quarter of 2022 (at left) and the first quarter of 2023 (at right). Caterpillar management utilizes these charts internally to visually communicate with the company’s board of directors and employees. The bar titled Other includes consolidating adjustments and Machinery, Energy & Transportation's other operating (income) expenses.Operating profit for the first quarter of 2023 was $2.731 billion, an increase of $876 million, or 47 percent, compared with $1.855 billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was primarily due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume, partially offset by the impact of the divestiture of the company's Longwall business and higher manufacturing costs. Unfavorable manufacturing costs largely reflected higher material costs. In the first quarter of 2023, the divestiture of the company’s Longwall business was finalized, resulting in an unfavorable impact to operating profit of $586 million, primarily a non-cash item driven by the release of accumulated foreign currency translation.Operating profit margin was 17.2 percent for the first quarter of 2023, compared with 13.7 percent for the first quarter of 2022.
▪Interest expense excluding Financial Products in the first quarter of 2023 was $129 million, compared with $109 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was due to higher average borrowing rates.▪Other income (expense) in the first quarter of 2023 was income of $32 million, compared with income of $253 million in the first quarter of 2022. The change was primarily driven by unfavorable impacts from foreign currency exchange, commodity hedges and pension and OPEB plan costs, all partially offset by higher investment and interest income.▪The provision for income taxes for the first quarter of 2023 reflected an estimated annual tax rate of 23 percent, compared with 24 percent for the first quarter of 2022, excluding the discrete items discussed below. The comparative tax rate for full-year 2022 was 23.2 percent.The estimated annual tax rate excludes the impact of the nondeductible loss of $586 million related to the divestiture of the company’s Longwall business in the first quarter of 2023. In addition, a discrete tax benefit of $32 million was recorded in the first quarter of 2023, compared with a $12 million benefit in the first quarter of 2022, for the settlement of stock-based compensation awards with associated tax deductions in excess of cumulative U.S. GAAP compensation expense.
Construction Industries’ total sales were $6.746 billion in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $631 million, or 10 percent, compared with $6.115 billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was due to favorable price realization, partially offset by lower sales volume and unfavorable currency impacts primarily related to the Japanese yen, euro and Chinese yuan. The decrease in sales volume was driven by the impact from changes in dealer inventories. Dealer inventory increased more during the first quarter of 2022 than during the first quarter of 2023.▪In North America, sales increased due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume. Higher sales volume was driven by the impact from changes in dealer inventories. Dealer inventory increased more during the first quarter of 2023 than during the first quarter of 2022.▪Sales decreased in Latin America primarily due to lower sales volume, partially offset by favorable price realization. Lower sales volume was driven by the impact from changes in dealer inventories. Dealer inventory increased during the first quarter of 2022, compared with a decrease during the first quarter of 2023.▪In EAME, sales increased primarily due to favorable price realization, partially offset by unfavorable currency impacts, mainly related to the euro.▪Sales decreased in Asia/Pacific primarily due to lower sales volume and unfavorable currency impacts, primarily related to the Japanese yen and Chinese yuan, partially offset by favorable price realization. Lower sales volume was driven by the impact from changes in dealer inventories and lower sales of equipment to end users. Dealer inventory increased more during the first quarter of 2022 than during the first quarter of 2023. Construction Industries’ profit was $1.790 billion in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $733 million, or 69 percent, compared with $1.057 billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was mainly due to favorable price realization, partially offset by lower sales volume, including an unfavorable mix of products, and unfavorable manufacturing costs. Unfavorable manufacturing costs largely reflected higher material costs.Construction Industries’ profit as a percent of total sales was 26.5 percent in the first quarter of 2023, compared with 17.3 percent in the first quarter of 2022.
Resource Industries’ total sales were $3.427 billion in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $597 million, or 21 percent, compared with $2.830 billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was primarily due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume. The increase in sales volume was due to higher sales of equipment to end users, partially offset by lower aftermarket parts sales volume.Resource Industries’ profit was $764 million in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $403 million, or 112 percent, compared with $361 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was mainly due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume, partially offset by unfavorable manufacturing costs. Unfavorable manufacturing costs largely reflected higher material costs.Resource Industries’ profit as a percent of total sales was 22.3 percent in the first quarter of 2023, compared with 12.8 percent in the first quarter of 2022.
Energy & Transportation’s total sales were $6.254 billion in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $1.216 billion, or 24 percent, compared with $5.038 billion in the first quarter of 2022. Sales increased across all applications and inter-segment sales. The increase in sales was primarily due to higher sales volume and favorable price realization.▪Oil and Gas – Sales increased for reciprocating engine aftermarket parts and engines used in well servicing and gas compression applications. Turbines and turbine-related services increased as well.▪Power Generation – Sales increased in large reciprocating engines, primarily data center applications, and small reciprocating engines. Turbines and turbine-related services increased as well.▪Industrial – Sales were up across all regions.▪Transportation – Sales increased in rail services and marine. International locomotive deliveries were also higher.Energy & Transportation’s profit was $1.057 billion in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $519 million, or 96 percent, compared with $538 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was mainly due to favorable price realization and higher sales volume, partially offset by unfavorable manufacturing costs and higher SG&A/R&D expenses. Unfavorable manufacturing costs were driven by higher material costs. The increase in SG&A/R&D expenses was primarily driven by investments aligned with strategic initiatives.Energy & Transportation’s profit as a percent of total sales was 16.9 percent in the first quarter of 2023, compared with 10.7 percent in the first quarter of 2022.
Financial Products’ segment revenues were $902 million in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $119 million, or 15 percent, compared with $783 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher average financing rates across all regions.Financial Products’ segment profit was $232 million in the first quarter of 2023, a decrease of $6 million, or 3 percent, compared with $238 million in the first quarter of 2022. The decrease was mainly due to unfavorable impacts from equity securities, currency exchange losses and mark-to-market adjustments on derivative contracts. These unfavorable impacts were partially offset by higher net yield on average earning assets and lower provision for credit losses at Cat Financial. At the end of the first quarter of 2023, past dues at Cat Financial were 2.00 percent, compared with 2.05 percent at the end of the first quarter of 2022. Write-offs, net of recoveries, were $10 million for the first quarter of 2023, compared with $8 million for the first quarter of 2022. As of March 31, 2023, Cat Financial's allowance for credit losses totaled $348 million, or 1.27 percent of finance receivables, compared with $346 million, or 1.29 percent of finance receivables at December 31, 2022.
Expense for corporate items and eliminations was $983 million in the first quarter of 2023, an increase of $722 million from the first quarter of 2022, primarily driven by the divestiture of the company's Longwall business and increased expenses due to timing differences.In the first quarter of 2023, the divestiture of the company’s Longwall business was finalized, resulting in an unfavorable impact to operating profit of $586 million, primarily a non-cash item driven by the release of accumulated foreign currency translation. This impact was included in total restructuring costs.
In 2023, we expect to incur about $700 million of restructuring costs, which include a pre-tax loss of approximately $586 million from the divestiture of our Longwall business within Resource Industries on February 1, 2023.  In addition, we expect to incur about $100 million of restructuring costs this year primarily related to strategic actions to address a small number of products.  We expect that prior restructuring actions will result in an incremental benefit to operating costs, primarily Cost of goods sold and SG&A expenses of about $100 million in 2023 compared with 2022. Additional information related to restructuring costs is included in Note 20 - "Restructuring Costs" of Part I, Item 1 "Financial Statements".
1.Adjusted Operating Profit Margin – Operating profit excluding restructuring costs, which include the divestiture of the company’s Longwall business, as a percent of sales and revenues.2.Adjusted Profit Per Share – Profit per share excluding restructuring costs, which include the divestiture of the company’s Longwall business.3.All Other Segment – Primarily includes activities such as: business strategy; product management and development; manufacturing and sourcing of filters and fluids, undercarriage, ground-engaging tools, fluid transfer products, precision seals, rubber sealing and connecting components primarily for Cat® products; parts distribution; integrated logistics solutions; distribution services responsible for dealer development and administration, including a wholly owned dealer in Japan; dealer portfolio management and ensuring the most efficient and effective distribution of machines, engines and parts; brand management and marketing strategy; and digital investments for new customer and dealer solutions that integrate data analytics with state-of-the-art digital technologies while transforming the buying experience.4.Consolidating Adjustments – Elimination of transactions between Machinery, Energy & Transportation and Financial Products.5.Construction Industries – A segment primarily responsible for supporting customers using machinery in infrastructure and building construction applications. Responsibilities include business strategy, product design, product management and development, manufacturing, marketing and sales and product support. The product portfolio includes asphalt pavers; backhoe loaders; cold planers; compactors; compact track loaders; forestry machines; material handlers; motor graders; pipelayers; road reclaimers; skid steer loaders; telehandlers; track-type loaders; track-type tractors (small, medium); track excavators (mini, small, medium, large); wheel excavators; wheel loaders (compact, small, medium); and related parts and work tools.6.Corporate Items and Eliminations – Includes corporate-level expenses, timing differences (as some expenses are reported in segment profit on a cash basis), methodology differences between segment and consolidated external reporting, certain restructuring costs and inter-segment eliminations.7.Currency – With respect to sales and revenues, currency represents the translation impact on sales resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates versus the U.S. dollar. With respect to operating profit, currency represents the net translation impact on sales and operating costs resulting from changes in foreign currency exchange rates versus the U.S. dollar. Currency only includes the impact on sales and operating profit for the Machinery, Energy & Transportation line of business; currency impacts on Financial Products revenues and operating profit are included in the Financial Products portions of the respective analyses. With respect to other income/expense, currency represents the effects of forward and option contracts entered into by the company to reduce the risk of fluctuations in exchange rates (hedging) and the net effect of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on our foreign currency assets and liabilities for consolidated results (translation).8.Dealer Inventories – Represents dealer machine and engine inventories, excluding aftermarket parts.9.EAME – A geographic region including Europe, Africa, the Middle East and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).10.Earning Assets – Assets consisting primarily of total finance receivables net of unearned income, plus equipment on operating leases net of accumulated depreciation at Cat Financial.11.Energy & Transportation – A segment primarily responsible for supporting customers using reciprocating engines, turbines, diesel-electric locomotives and related services across industries serving Oil and Gas, Power Generation, Industrial and Transportation applications, including marine- and rail-related businesses. Responsibilities include business strategy, product design, product management, development and testing, manufacturing, marketing and sales and product support. The product and services portfolio includes turbines, centrifugal gas compressors, and turbine-related services; reciprocating engine-powered generator sets; integrated systems and solutions used in the electric power generation industry; reciprocating engines, drivetrain and integrated systems and solutions for the marine and oil and gas industries; reciprocating engines, drivetrain and integrated systems and solutions supplied to the industrial industry as well as Cat machinery; electrified powertrain and zero-emission power sources and service solutions development; and diesel-electric locomotives and components and other rail-related products and services, including remanufacturing and leasing. Responsibilities also include the remanufacturing of Caterpillar reciprocating engines and components and remanufacturing services for other companies; and product support of on-highway vocational trucks for North America.12.Financial Products – The company defines Financial Products as our finance and insurance subsidiaries, primarily Caterpillar Financial Services Corporation (Cat Financial) and Caterpillar Insurance Holdings Inc. (Insurance Services). Financial Products’ information relates to the financing to customers and dealers for the purchase and lease of Caterpillar and other equipment.13.Financial Products Segment – Provides financing alternatives to customers and dealers around the world for Caterpillar products and services, as well as financing for power generation facilities that, in most cases, incorporate Caterpillar products. Financing plans include operating and finance leases, revolving charge accounts, installment sale contracts, repair/rebuild financing, working capital loans and wholesale financing plans. The segment also provides insurance and risk management products and services that help customers and dealers manage their business risk. Insurance and risk management products offered include physical damage insurance, inventory protection plans, extended service coverage and maintenance plans for machines and engines, and dealer property and casualty insurance. The various forms of financing, insurance and risk management products offered to customers and dealers help support the purchase and lease of Caterpillar equipment. The segment also earns revenues from Machinery, Energy & Transportation, but the related costs are not allocated to operating segments. Financial Products’ segment profit is determined on a pretax basis and includes other income/expense items.14.Latin America – A geographic region including Central and South American countries and Mexico.15.Machinery, Energy & Transportation (ME&T) – The company defines ME&T as Caterpillar Inc. and its subsidiaries, excluding Financial Products. ME&T’s information relates to the design, manufacturing and marketing of its products. 16.Machinery, Energy & Transportation Other Operating (Income) Expenses – Comprised primarily of gains/losses on disposal of long-lived assets, gains/losses on divestitures and legal settlements and accruals.17.Manufacturing Costs – Manufacturing costs exclude the impacts of currency and represent the volume-adjusted change for variable costs and the absolute dollar change for period manufacturing costs. Variable manufacturing costs are defined as having a direct relationship with the volume of production. This includes material costs, direct labor and other costs that vary directly with production volume, such as freight, power to operate machines and supplies that are consumed in the manufacturing process. Period manufacturing costs support production but are defined as generally not having a direct relationship to short-term changes in volume. Examples include machinery and equipment repair, depreciation on manufacturing assets, facility support, procurement, factory scheduling, manufacturing planning and operations management.18.Mark-to-market gains/losses – Represents the net gain or loss of actual results differing from the company’s assumptions and the effects of changing assumptions for our defined benefit pension and OPEB plans. These gains and losses are immediately recognized through earnings upon the annual remeasurement in the fourth quarter, or on an interim basis as triggering events warrant remeasurement.19.Pension and Other Postemployment Benefits (OPEB) – The company’s defined-benefit pension and postretirement benefit plans.20.Price Realization – The impact of net price changes excluding currency and new product introductions. Price realization includes geographic mix of sales, which is the impact of changes in the relative weighting of sales prices between geographic regions.21.Resource Industries – A segment primarily responsible for supporting customers using machinery in mining, heavy construction and quarry and aggregates. Responsibilities include business strategy, product design, product management and development, manufacturing, marketing and sales and product support. The product portfolio includes large track-type tractors; large mining trucks; hard rock vehicles; longwall miners; electric rope shovels; draglines; hydraulic shovels; rotary drills; large wheel loaders; off-highway trucks; articulated trucks; wheel tractor scrapers; wheel dozers; landfill compactors; soil compactors; select work tools; machinery components; electronics and control systems and related parts. In addition to equipment, Resource Industries also develops and sells technology products and services to provide customers fleet management, equipment management analytics, autonomous machine capabilities, safety services and mining performance solutions. Resource Industries also manages areas that provide services to other parts of the company, including strategic procurement, lean center of excellence, integrated manufacturing, research and development for hydraulic systems, automation, electronics and software for Cat machines and engines.22.Restructuring Costs – May include costs for employee separation, long-lived asset impairments, contract terminations and divestiture impacts. These costs are included in Other operating (income) expenses except for defined-benefit plan curtailment losses and special termination benefits, which are included in Other income (expense). Restructuring costs also include other exit-related costs, which may consist of accelerated depreciation, inventory write-downs, building demolition, equipment relocation and project management costs and LIFO inventory decrement benefits from inventory liquidations at closed facilities, all of which are primarily included in Cost of goods sold.23.Sales Volume – With respect to sales and revenues, sales volume represents the impact of changes in the quantities sold for Machinery, Energy & Transportation as well as the incremental sales impact of new product introductions, including emissions-related product updates. With respect to operating profit, sales volume represents the impact of changes in the quantities sold for Machinery, Energy & Transportation combined with product mix as well as the net operating profit impact of new product introductions, including emissions-related product updates. Product mix represents the net operating profit impact of changes in the relative weighting of Machinery, Energy & Transportation sales with respect to total sales. The impact of sales volume on segment profit includes inter-segment sales.24.Services – Enterprise services include, but are not limited to, aftermarket parts, Financial Products revenues and other service-related revenues. Machinery, Energy & Transportation segments exclude most Financial Products revenues.
We generate significant capital resources from operating activities, which are the primary source of funding for our ME&T operations. Funding for these businesses is also available from commercial paper and long-term debt issuances. Financial Products’ operations are funded primarily from commercial paper, term debt issuances and collections from its existing portfolio. On a consolidated basis, we had positive operating cash flow in the first three months of 2023 and ended the first quarter with $6.79 billion of cash, a decrease of $215 million from year-end 2022. In addition, ME&T has invested in available-for-sale debt securities that are considered highly liquid and are available for current operations. These securities are included in Prepaid expenses and other current assets and Other assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and were $1.76 billion at the end of March 31, 2023.  We intend to maintain a strong cash and liquidity position.  Consolidated operating cash flow for the first three months of 2023 was $1.57 billion, up $1.26 billion compared to the same period a year ago. The increase was primarily due to higher profit before taxes adjusted for non-cash items, including the loss on divestiture of the company's Longwall business. Total debt as of March 31, 2023 was $37.04 billion, an increase of $45 million from year-end 2022. Debt related to ME&T decreased $26 million in the first three months of 2023 while debt related to Financial Products increased $71 million.As of March 31, 2023, we had three global credit facilities with a syndicate of banks totaling $10.50 billion (Credit Facility) available in the aggregate to both Caterpillar and Cat Financial for general liquidity purposes. Based on management’s allocation decision, which can be revised from time to time, the portion of the Credit Facility available to ME&T as of March 31, 2023 was $2.75 billion. Information on our Credit Facility is as follows:•The 364-day facility of $3.15 billion (of which $825 million is available to ME&T) expires in August 2023.•The three-year facility, as amended and restated in September 2022, of $2.73 billion (of which $715 million is available to ME&T) expires in August 2025.•The five-year facility, as amended and restated in September 2022, of $4.62 billion (of which $1.21 billion is available to ME&T) expires in September 2027.At March 31, 2023, Caterpillar’s consolidated net worth was $18.21 billion, which was above the $9.00 billion required under the Credit Facility. The consolidated net worth is defined in the Credit Facility as the consolidated shareholders’ equity including preferred stock but excluding the pension and other postretirement benefits balance within Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).At March 31, 2023, Cat Financial’s covenant interest coverage ratio was 2.15 to 1. This was above the 1.15 to 1 minimum ratio calculated as (1) profit excluding income taxes, interest expense and net gain (loss) from interest rate derivatives to (2) interest expense calculated at the end of each calendar quarter for the rolling four quarter period then most recently ended, required by the Credit Facility.In addition, at March 31, 2023, Cat Financial’s six-month covenant leverage ratio was 7.16 to 1. This was below the maximum ratio of debt to net worth of 10 to 1, calculated (1) on a monthly basis as the average of the leverage ratios determined on the last day of each of the six preceding calendar months and (2) at each December 31, required by the Credit Facility.In the event Caterpillar or Cat Financial does not meet one or more of their respective financial covenants under the Credit Facility in the future (and are unable to obtain a consent or waiver), the syndicate of banks may terminate the commitments allocated to the party that does not meet its covenants. Additionally, in such event, certain of Cat Financial’s other lenders under other loan agreements where similar financial covenants or cross default provisions are applicable may, at their election, choose to pursue remedies under those loan agreements, including accelerating the repayment of outstanding borrowings. At March 31, 2023, there were no borrowings under the Credit Facility. Our total credit commitments and available credit as of March 31, 2023 were:
The other external consolidated credit lines with banks as of March 31, 2023 totaled $4.16 billion. These committed and uncommitted credit lines, which may be eligible for renewal at various future dates or have no specified expiration date, are used primarily by our subsidiaries for local funding requirements. Caterpillar or Cat Financial may guarantee subsidiary borrowings under these lines.We receive debt ratings from the major credit rating agencies. Moody’s, Fitch and S&P maintain a “mid-A” debt rating. A downgrade of our credit ratings by any of the major credit rating agencies could result in increased borrowing costs and could make access to certain credit markets more difficult. In the event economic conditions deteriorate such that access to debt markets becomes unavailable, ME&T’s operations would rely on cash flow from operations, use of existing cash balances, borrowings from Cat Financial and access to our committed credit facilities. Our Financial Products’ operations would rely on cash flow from its existing portfolio, existing cash balances, access to our committed credit facilities and other credit line facilities of Cat Financial, and potential borrowings from Caterpillar. In addition, we maintain a support agreement with Cat Financial, which requires Caterpillar to remain the sole owner of Cat Financial and may, under certain circumstances, require Caterpillar to make payments to Cat Financial should Cat Financial fail to maintain certain financial ratios.We facilitate voluntary supplier finance programs (the “Programs”) through participating financial institutions. We account for payments made under the Programs, the same as our other accounts payable, as a reduction to our cash flows from operations. We do not believe that changes in the availability of supplier financing will have a significant impact on our liquidity.   Additional information related to the Programs is included in Note 2 - "New accounting guidance" of Part I, Item 1 "Financial Statements".
Net cash provided by operating activities was $1.78 billion in the first three months of 2023, compared with net cash used of $78 million for the same period in 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher profit before taxes adjusted for non-cash items, including the loss on divestiture of the company's Longwall business and lower working capital requirements. Within working capital, changes in receivables, accounts payable, customer advances and accrued expenses favorably impacted cash flow, but were partially offset by changes in inventories.Net cash used by investing activities in the first three months of 2023 was $670 million, compared with net cash used of $1.09 billion in the first three months of 2022. The change was primarily due to decreases in net investment activity. Net cash used for financing activities during the first three months of 2023 was $1.14 billion, compared with net cash used of $1.57 billion in the same period of 2022. The change was primarily due to lower share repurchases in the first three months of 2023. While our short-term priorities for the use of cash may vary from time to time as business needs and conditions dictate, our long-term cash deployment strategy is focused on the following priorities. Our top priority is to maintain a strong financial position in support of a mid-A rating. Next, we intend to fund operational requirements and commitments. Then, we intend to fund priorities that profitably grow the company and return capital to shareholders through dividend growth and share repurchases. Additional information on cash deployment is as follows:Strong financial position – Our top priority is to maintain a strong financial position in support of a mid-A rating. We track a diverse group of financial metrics that focus on liquidity, leverage, cash flow and margins which align with our cash deployment actions and the various methodologies used by the major credit rating agencies.Operational excellence and commitments – Capital expenditures were $414 million during the first three months of 2023, compared to $348 million for the same period in 2022. We expect ME&T’s capital expenditures in 2023 to be about $1.5 billion. We made $208 million of contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans during the first three months of 2023. We currently anticipate full-year 2023 contributions of approximately $372 million. In comparison, we made $210 million of contributions to our pension and other postretirement benefit plans during the first three months of 2022.Fund strategic growth initiatives and return capital to shareholders – We intend to utilize our liquidity and debt capacity to fund targeted investments that drive long-term profitable growth focused in the areas of expanded offerings and services, including acquisitions. As part of our capital allocation strategy, ME&T free cash flow is a liquidity measure we use to determine the cash generated and available for financing activities including debt repayments, dividends and share repurchases. We define ME&T free cash flow as cash from ME&T operations less capital expenditures, excluding discretionary pension and other postretirement benefit plan contributions and cash payments related to settlements with the U.S. Internal Revenue Service. A goal of our capital allocation strategy is to return substantially all ME&T free cash flow to shareholders over time in the form of dividends and share repurchases, while maintaining our mid-A rating.Our share repurchase plans are subject to the company’s cash deployment priorities and are evaluated on an ongoing basis considering the financial condition of the company and the economic outlook, corporate cash flow, the company’s liquidity needs, and the health and stability of global credit markets. The timing and amount of future repurchases may vary depending on market conditions and investing priorities. In July 2018, the Board approved a share repurchase authorization (the 2018 Authorization) of up to $10.0 billion of Caterpillar common stock effective January 1, 2019, with no expiration. In May 2022, the Board approved a share repurchase authorization (the 2022 Authorization) of up to $15.0 billion of Caterpillar common stock effective August 1, 2022, with no expiration. The Company commenced utilization of the 2022 Authorization for all share repurchases on August 1, 2022, leaving approximately $70 million unutilized under the 2018 Authorization as of March 31, 2023. The Company does not intend to repurchase any additional shares under the 2018 Authorization.In the first three months of 2023, we repurchased $400 million of Caterpillar common stock, with $12.40 billion remaining under the 2022 Authorization as of March 31, 2023. Our basic shares outstanding as of March 31, 2023 were approximately 516 million. Each quarter, our Board of Directors reviews the company’s dividend for the applicable quarter. The Board evaluates the financial condition of the company and considers the economic outlook, corporate cash flow, the company’s liquidity needs, and the health and stability of global credit markets to determine whether to maintain or change the quarterly dividend. In April 2023, the Board of Directors approved maintaining our quarterly dividend representing $1.20 per share, and we continue to expect our strong financial position to support the dividend. Dividends paid totaled $620 million in the first three months of 2023.
Financial Products operating cash flow was $302 million in the first three months of 2023, compared with $393 million for the same period in 2022. Net cash used for investing activities was $444 million for the first three months of 2023, compared with net cash used of $221 million for the same period in 2022. The change was primarily due to portfolio related activity. Net cash used for financing activities was $43 million for the first three months of 2023 compared with net cash used of $142 million for the same period in 2022. The change was primarily due to higher portfolio funding requirements related to net intercompany purchased receivables.
For a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements, see Part I, Item 1. Note 2 - “New accounting guidance”.
For a discussion of the company’s critical accounting estimates, see Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K. There have been no significant changes to our critical accounting estimates since our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Information related to legal proceedings appears in Note 14—Environmental and Legal Matters of Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
At the end of the first quarter of 2023, the dollar amount of backlog believed to be firm was approximately $30.4 billion, which was about flat to the fourth quarter of 2022.  Of the total backlog at March 31, 2023, approximately $5.6 billion was not expected to be filled in the following twelve months.
We provide the following definitions for the non-GAAP financial measures used in this report. These non-GAAP financial measures have no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and therefore are unlikely to be comparable to the calculation of similar measures for other companies. Management does not intend these items to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related GAAP measures.We believe it is important to separately quantify the profit impact of two significant items in order for our results to be meaningful to our readers. These items consist of (i) restructuring costs related to the divestiture of the company's Longwall business and (ii) other restructuring costs. We do not consider these items indicative of earnings from ongoing business activities and believe the non-GAAP measure provides investors with useful perspective on underlying business results and trends and aids with assessing our period-over-period results. In addition, we provide a calculation of ME&T free cash flow as we believe it is an important measure for investors to determine the cash generation available for financing activities including debt repayments, dividends and share repurchases. Reconciliations of adjusted results to the most directly comparable GAAP measures are as follows:
Reconciliations of ME&T free cash flow to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by operating activities are as follows:
We are providing supplemental consolidating data for the purpose of additional analysis.  The data has been grouped as follows:Consolidated – Caterpillar Inc. and its subsidiaries.Machinery, Energy & Transportation – We define ME&T as it is presented in the supplemental data as Caterpillar Inc. and its subsidiaries, excluding Financial Products. ME&T’s information relates to the design, manufacturing and marketing of our products.Financial Products – We define Financial Products as it is presented in the supplemental data as our finance and insurance subsidiaries, primarily Caterpillar Financial Services Corporation (Cat Financial) and Caterpillar Insurance Holdings Inc. (Insurance Services).  Financial Products’ information relates to the financing to customers and dealers for the purchase and lease of Caterpillar and other equipment.Consolidating Adjustments – Eliminations of transactions between ME&T and Financial Products.The nature of the ME&T and Financial Products businesses is different, especially with regard to the financial position and cash flow items. Caterpillar management utilizes this presentation internally to highlight these differences.  We believe this presentation will assist readers in understanding our business.Pages 57 to 62 reconcile ME&T and Financial Products to Caterpillar Inc. consolidated financial information. Certain amounts for prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation.
1Elimination of Financial Products’ revenues earned from ME&T.2Elimination of net expenses recorded by ME&T paid to Financial Products.3Elimination of discount recorded by ME&T on receivables sold to Financial Products and of interest earned between ME&T and Financial Products as well as dividends paid by Financial Products to ME&T.4Elimination of equity profit (loss) earned from Financial Products’ subsidiaries partially owned by ME&T subsidiaries.5Elimination of noncontrolling interest profit (loss) recorded by Financial Products for subsidiaries partially owned by ME&T subsidiaries.6Profit attributable to common shareholders.
1Elimination of Financial Products’ revenues earned from ME&T.2Elimination of net expenses recorded by ME&T paid to Financial Products.3Elimination of discount recorded by ME&T on receivables sold to Financial Products and of interest earned between ME&T and Financial Products as well as dividends paid by Financial Products to ME&T.4Elimination of equity profit (loss) earned from Financial Products’ subsidiaries partially owned by ME&T subsidiaries.5Elimination of noncontrolling interest profit (loss) recorded by Financial Products for subsidiaries partially owned by ME&T subsidiaries.6Profit attributable to common shareholders.
1     Elimination of receivables between ME&T and Financial Products.2     Reclassification of ME&T’s trade receivables purchased by Financial Products and Financial Products’ wholesale inventory receivables.3     Elimination of ME&T’s insurance premiums that are prepaid to Financial Products.4     Reclassification reflecting required netting of deferred tax assets/liabilities by taxing jurisdiction.5     Elimination of other intercompany assets between ME&T and Financial Products.6     Elimination of payables between ME&T and Financial Products.7     Reclassification of Financial Products' payables to accrued expenses or customer advances.8     Elimination of prepaid insurance in Financial Products’ other liabilities.9     Elimination of debt between ME&T and Financial Products.10     Eliminations associated with ME&T’s investments in Financial Products’ subsidiaries.
1     Elimination of receivables between ME&T and Financial Products.2     Reclassification of ME&T’s trade receivables purchased by Financial Products and Financial Products’ wholesale inventory receivables.3     Elimination of ME&T’s insurance premiums that are prepaid to Financial Products.4     Reclassification reflecting required netting of deferred tax assets/liabilities by taxing jurisdiction.5     Elimination of other intercompany assets between ME&T and Financial Products.6     Elimination of payables between ME&T and Financial Products.7     Elimination of prepaid insurance in Financial Products' other liabilities.8     Elimination of debt between ME&T and Financial Products.9     Eliminations associated with ME&T’s investments in Financial Products’ subsidiaries.
1    Elimination of equity profit earned from Financial Products' subsidiaries partially owned by ME&T subsidiaries.2    Elimination of non-cash adjustments and changes in assets and liabilities related to consolidated reporting.3    Reclassification of Financial Products’ cash flow activity from investing to operating for receivables that arose from the sale of inventory.4    Elimination of net proceeds and payments to/from ME&T and Financial Products.5    Elimination of dividend activity between Financial Products and ME&T.
1    Elimination of equity profit earned from Financial Products' subsidiaries partially owned by ME&T subsidiaries.2    Elimination of non-cash adjustments and changes in assets and liabilities related to consolidated reporting.3    Reclassification of Financial Products’ cash flow activity from investing to operating for receivables that arose from the sale of inventory.4    Elimination of net proceeds and payments to/from ME&T and Financial Products.
Certain statements in this Form 10-Q relate to future events and expectations and are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as “believe,” “estimate,” “will be,” “will,” “would,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “forecast,” “target,” “guide,” “project,” “intend,” “could,” “should” or other similar words or expressions often identify forward-looking statements. All statements other than statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, statements regarding our outlook, projections, forecasts or trend descriptions. These statements do not guarantee future performance and speak only as of the date they are made, and we do not undertake to update our forward-looking statements.Caterpillar’s actual results may differ materially from those described or implied in our forward-looking statements based on a number of factors, including, but not limited to: (i) global and regional economic conditions and economic conditions in the industries we serve; (ii) commodity price changes, material price increases, fluctuations in demand for our products or significant shortages of material; (iii) government monetary or fiscal policies; (iv) political and economic risks, commercial instability and events beyond our control in the countries in which we operate; (v) international trade policies and their impact on demand for our products and our competitive position, including the imposition of new tariffs or changes in existing tariff rates; (vi) our ability to develop, produce and market quality products that meet our customers’ needs; (vii) the impact of the highly competitive environment in which we operate on our sales and pricing; (viii) information technology security threats and computer crime; (ix) inventory management decisions and sourcing practices of our dealers and our OEM customers; (x) a failure to realize, or a delay in realizing, all of the anticipated benefits of our acquisitions, joint ventures or divestitures; (xi) union disputes or other employee relations issues; (xii) adverse effects of unexpected events; (xiii) disruptions or volatility in global financial markets limiting our sources of liquidity or the liquidity of our customers, dealers and suppliers; (xiv) failure to maintain our credit ratings and potential resulting increases to our cost of borrowing and adverse effects on our cost of funds, liquidity, competitive position and access to capital markets; (xv) our Financial Products segment’s risks associated with the financial services industry; (xvi) changes in interest rates or market liquidity conditions; (xvii) an increase in delinquencies, repossessions or net losses of Cat Financial’s customers; (xviii) currency fluctuations; (xix) our or Cat Financial’s compliance with financial and other restrictive covenants in debt agreements; (xx) increased pension plan funding obligations; (xxi) alleged or actual violations of trade or anti-corruption laws and regulations; (xxii) additional tax expense or exposure, including the impact of U.S. tax reform; (xxiii) significant legal proceedings, claims, lawsuits or government investigations; (xxiv) new regulations or changes in financial services regulations; (xxv) compliance with environmental laws and regulations; (xxvi) catastrophic events, including global pandemics such as the COVID-19 pandemic; and (xxvii) other factors described in more detail under the section entitled "Part I - Item 1A. Risk Factors" of Caterpillar's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, as such factors may be updated from time to time in Caterpillar's periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.