
Some of the statements, estimates or projections contained in this document are “forward-looking statements” that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions with respect to us, including some statements concerning future results, operations, outlooks, plans, goals, reputation, cash flows, liquidity and other events which have not yet occurred. These statements are intended to qualify for the safe harbors from liability provided by Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of historical facts are statements that could be deemed forward-looking. These statements are based on current expectations, estimates, forecasts and projections about our business and the industry in which we operate and the beliefs and assumptions of our management. We have tried, whenever possible, to identify these statements by using words like “will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “believe,” “depends,” “expect,” “goal,” “aspiration,” “anticipate,” “forecast,” “project,” “future,” “intend,” “plan,” “estimate,” “target,” “indicate,” “outlook,” and similar expressions of future intent or the negative of such terms.
Forward-looking statements include those statements that relate to our outlook and financial position including, but not limited to, statements regarding:
Because forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties, there are many factors that could cause our actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from those expressed or implied by our forward-looking statements. This note contains important cautionary statements of the known factors that we consider could materially affect the accuracy of our forward-looking statements and adversely affect our business, results of operations and financial position. Additionally, many of these risks and uncertainties are currently, and in the future may continue to be, amplified by our substantial debt balance as a result of the pause of our guest cruise operations. There may be additional risks that we consider immaterial or which are unknown. These factors include, but are not limited to, the following: •Events and conditions around the world, including war and other military actions, such as the invasion of Ukraine, inflation, higher fuel prices, higher interest rates and other general concerns impacting the ability or desire of people to travel have led, and may in the future lead, to a decline in demand for cruises, impacting our operating costs and profitability.•Pandemics have in the past and may in the future have a significant negative impact on our financial condition and operations.•Incidents concerning our ships, guests or the cruise industry have in the past and may, in the future, negatively impact the satisfaction of our guests and crew and lead to reputational damage. •Changes in and non-compliance with laws and regulations under which we operate, such as those relating to health, environment, safety and security, data privacy and protection, anti-corruption, economic sanctions, trade protection, labor and employment, and tax have in the past and may, in the future, lead to litigation, enforcement actions, fines, penalties and reputational damage. •Factors associated with climate change, including evolving and increasing regulations, increasing global concern about climate change and the shift in climate conscious consumerism and stakeholder scrutiny, and increasing frequency and/or severity of adverse weather conditions could adversely affect our business.•Inability to meet or achieve our sustainability related goals, aspirations, initiatives, and our public statements and disclosures regarding them, may expose us to risks that may adversely impact our business.•Breaches in data security and lapses in data privacy as well as disruptions and other damages to our principal offices, information technology operations and system networks and failure to keep pace with developments in technology may adversely impact our business operations, the satisfaction of our guests and crew and may lead to reputational damage. •The loss of key team members, our inability to recruit or retain qualified shoreside and shipboard team members and increased labor costs could have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations. •Increases in fuel prices, changes in the types of fuel consumed and availability of fuel supply may adversely impact our scheduled itineraries and costs.  •We rely on supply chain vendors who are integral to the operations of our businesses. These vendors and service providers are also affected by COVID-19 and may be unable to deliver on their commitments which could negatively impact our business.•Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates may adversely impact our financial results. •Overcapacity and competition in the cruise and land-based vacation industry may negatively impact our cruise sales, pricing and destination options.  •Inability to implement our shipbuilding programs and ship repairs, maintenance and refurbishments may adversely impact our business operations and the satisfaction of our guests. •Failure to successfully implement our business strategy following our resumption of guest cruise operations would negatively impact the occupancy levels and pricing of our cruises and could have a material adverse effect on our business. We require a significant amount of cash to service our debt and sustain our operations. Our ability to generate cash depends on many factors, including those beyond our control, and we may not be able to generate cash required to service our debt and sustain our operations.The ordering of the risk factors set forth above is not intended to reflect our indication of priority or likelihood. Forward-looking statements should not be relied upon as a prediction of actual results. Subject to any continuing obligations under applicable law or any relevant stock exchange rules, we expressly disclaim any obligation to disseminate, after the date of this document, any updates or revisions to any such forward-looking statements to reflect any change in expectations or events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements are based. Forward-looking and other statements in this document may also address our sustainability progress, plans and goals (including climate change and environmental-related matters). In addition, historical, current and forward-looking sustainability- and climate-related statements may be based on standards and tools for measuring progress that are still developing, internal controls and processes that continue to evolve, and assumptions and predictions that are subject to change in the future and may not be generally shared.
Refer to Note 1 - “General, Accounting Pronouncements” of the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion regarding Accounting Pronouncements.
For a discussion of our critical accounting estimates, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” that is included in the Form 10-K.
Our passenger ticket revenues are seasonal. Demand for cruises has been greatest during our third quarter, which includes the Northern Hemisphere summer months. This higher demand during the third quarter results in higher ticket prices and occupancy levels and, accordingly, the largest share of our operating income is typically earned during this period. The seasonality of our results also increases due to ships being taken out-of-service for maintenance, which we schedule during non-peak demand periods. In addition, substantially all of Holland America Princess Alaska Tours’ revenue and net income (loss) is generated from May through September in conjunction with Alaska’s cruise season.
•We believe the increased cost of fuel and other related costs are reasonably likely to continue to impact our profitability in both the short and long-term.  •We believe inflation and higher interest rates are reasonably likely to continue to impact our profitability.•We believe the increasing global focus on climate change, including the reduction of carbon emissions and new and evolving regulatory requirements, is reasonably likely to have a material negative impact on our future financial results. The full impact of climate change to our business is not yet known.
(a)PCD represents the number of cruise passengers on a voyage multiplied by the number of revenue-producing ship operating days for that voyage.(b)ALBD is a standard measure of passenger capacity for the period that we use to approximate rate and capacity variances, based on consistently applied formulas that we use to perform analyses to determine the main non-capacity driven factors that cause our cruise revenues and expenses to vary. ALBDs assume that each cabin we offer for sale accommodates two passengers and is computed by multiplying passenger capacity by revenue-producing ship operating days in the period.(c)Occupancy, in accordance with cruise industry practice, is calculated using a numerator of PCDs and a denominator of ALBDs, which assumes two passengers per cabin even though some cabins can accommodate three or more passengers. Percentages in excess of 100% indicate that on average more than two passengers occupied some cabins.
The effects of the pause in guest cruise operations in March 2020 and subsequent resumption of our guest cruise operations, inflation, higher fuel prices, higher interest rates and fluctuations in foreign currency rates are collectively having a material negative impact on all aspects of our business, including our results of operations, liquidity and financial position. We have a substantial debt balance and require a significant amount of cash to service our debt and sustain our operations. Our ability to generate cash will be affected by our ability to successfully implement our business strategy, which includes increasing our occupancy levels and pricing of our cruises, as well as general macroeconomic, financial, geopolitical, competitive, regulatory and other factors beyond our control. The full extent of these impacts is uncertain and may be amplified by our substantial debt balance.
Cruise passenger ticket revenues made up 65% of our total revenues in 2023 while onboard and other revenues made up 35%. Revenues in 2023 increased by $2.8 billion to $4.4 billion from $1.6 billion in 2022 due to the ongoing resumption of guest cruise operations, including the significant increase of ships in service and higher occupancy. As of February 28, 2023, 96% of our capacity was serving guests, compared to 71% as of February 28, 2022. ALBDs increased to 22.1 million in 2023 as compared to 13.3 million in 2022. Occupancy for 2023 was 91% compared to 54% in 2022.
Cruise passenger ticket revenues made up 61% of our NAA segment’s total revenues in 2023 while onboard and other cruise revenues made up 39%. NAA segment revenues in 2023 increased by $2.0 billion to $3.1 billion from $1.1 billion in 2022 due to the ongoing resumption of guest cruise operations, including the significant increase of ships in service and higher occupancy. Our NAA segment’s full fleet was serving guests as of February 28, 2023, compared to 69% as of February 28, 2022. ALBDs increased to 13.9 million in 2023 as compared to 8.7 million in 2022. Occupancy for 2023 was 98% compared to 59% in 2022.
Cruise passenger ticket revenues made up 77% of our Europe segment’s total revenues in 2023 while onboard and other cruise revenues made up 23%. Europe segment revenues in 2023 increased by $0.8 billion to $1.3 billion from $0.5 billion in 2022 due to the ongoing resumption of guest cruise operations, including the significant increase of ships in service and higher occupancy. Our Europe segment had 93% of its capacity serving guests as of February 28, 2023, compared to 73% as of February 28, 2022. ALBDs increased to 8.2 million in 2023 as compared to 4.6 million in 2022. Occupancy for 2023 was 80% compared to 45% in 2022.
Operating costs and expenses increased by $1.3 billion to $3.3 billion in 2023 from $2.0 billion in 2022. These increases were driven by our resumption of guest cruise operations and an increase in ships in service.Fuel costs increased by $170 million to $535 million in 2023 from $365 million in 2022. $110 million of this increase was driven by higher fuel consumption of 0.2 million metric tons, due to the resumption of guest cruise operations, and $60 million was driven by a combination of increases in fuel prices and changes in fuel mix of $81 per metric ton consumed in 2023 compared to 2022.Selling and administrative expenses increased by $182 million to $712 million in 2023 from $530 million in 2022. The increase was caused by increased administrative expenses and advertising costs incurred as part of our resumption of guest cruise operations.The drivers in changes in costs and expenses for our NAA and Europe segments are the same as those described for our consolidated results.
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $171 million to $539 million in 2023 from $368 million in 2022. The increase was caused by a higher average interest rate and a higher average debt balance in 2023 compared to 2022.
As of February 28, 2023, we had $8.1 billion of liquidity including cash and cash equivalents and borrowings available under our Revolving Facility. We will continue to pursue various opportunities to refinance future debt maturities and/or to extend the maturity dates associated with our existing indebtedness and obtain relevant financial covenant amendments or waivers, if needed.We had a working capital deficit of $3.9 billion as of February 28, 2023 compared to working capital deficit of $3.1 billion as of November 30, 2022. The increase in working capital deficit was caused by an increase in customer deposits and an overall decrease in cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash. We operate with a substantial working capital deficit. This deficit is mainly attributable to the fact that, under our business model, substantially all of our passenger ticket receipts are collected in advance of the applicable sailing date. These advance passenger receipts generally remain a current liability until the sailing date. The cash generated from these advance receipts is used interchangeably with cash on hand from other sources, such as our borrowings and other cash from operations. The cash received as advanced receipts can be used to fund operating expenses, pay down our debt, make long-term investments or any other use of cash. Included within our working capital are $5.5 billion and $4.9 billion of customer deposits as of February 28, 2023 and November 30, 2022, respectively. We have agreements with a number of credit card processors that transact customer deposits related to our cruise vacations. Certain of these agreements allow the credit card processors to request, under certain circumstances, that we provide a reserve fund in cash. In addition, we have a relatively low level of accounts receivable and limited investment in inventories.Refer to Note 1 - “General, Liquidity and Management’s Plans” of the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion regarding our liquidity.
Our business provided $0.4 billion of net cash flows in operating activities during the three months ended February 28, 2023, an increase of $1.6 billion, compared to $1.2 billion used for the same period in 2022. This was driven by a decrease in the net loss compared to the same period in 2022 and an increase in customer deposits.
During the three months ended February 28, 2023, net cash used in investing activities was $1.0 billion. This was driven by:•Capital expenditures of $0.8 billion for our ongoing new shipbuilding program•Capital expenditures of $243 million for ship improvements and replacements, information technology and buildings and improvements•Proceeds from sale of ships of $23 millionDuring the three months ended February 28, 2022, net cash used in investing activities was $3.0 billion. This was driven by:•Capital expenditures of $2.5 billion for our ongoing new shipbuilding program•Capital expenditures of $221 million for ship improvements and replacements, information technology and buildings and improvements•Proceeds from sale of ships and other of $18 million•Purchases of short-term investments of $315 million
During the three months ended February 28, 2023, net cash provided by financing activities of $0.1 billion was caused by: •Issuances of $0.8 billion of long-term debt•Repayments of $0.7 billion of long-term debt•Payments of $40 million related to debt issuance costsDuring the three months ended February 28, 2022, net cash provided by financing activities of $1.7 billion was caused by:•Issuances of $2.3 billion of long-term debt•Repayments of $503 million of long-term debt•Payments of $85 million related to debt issuance costs•Net repayments of short-term borrowings of $48 million•Purchases of $23 million of Carnival plc ordinary shares and issuances of $27 million of Carnival Corporation common stock under our Stock Swap Program
As of February 28, 2023, we had $8.1 billion of liquidity including $5.5 billion of cash and cash equivalents and $2.6 billion of borrowings available under our Revolving Facility, which matures in 2024. In February 2023, Carnival Holdings II entered into the New Revolving Facility, which may be utilized beginning in August 2024, at which date it will replace our existing Revolving Facility. Refer to Note 3 - “Debt” of the consolidated financial statements for additional discussion. In addition, we had $3.2 billion of undrawn export credit facilities to fund ship deliveries planned through 2025. We plan to use existing liquidity and future cash flows from operations to fund our cash requirements including capital expenditures not funded by our export credit facilities. We seek to manage our credit risk exposures, including counterparty nonperformance associated with our cash and cash equivalents, and future financing facilities by conducting business with well-established financial institutions, and export credit agencies and diversifying our counterparties.
Our export credit facilities contain various financial covenants as described in Note 3 - “Debt”. At February 28, 2023, we were in compliance with the applicable covenants under our debt agreements.
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, including guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests, certain derivative instruments and variable interest entities that either have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial statements.