
Cadence is a leader in electronic system design, building upon more than 30 years of computational software expertise. We apply our underlying Intelligent System Design strategy to deliver computational software, hardware and intellectual property (“IP”) that turn design concepts into reality. We enable our customers to develop electronic products. Our products and services are designed to give our customers a competitive edge in their development of integrated circuits (“ICs”), systems-on-chip (“SoCs”), and increasingly sophisticated electronic devices and systems. Our products and services do this by optimizing performance, minimizing power consumption, shortening the time to bring our customers’ products to market, improving engineering productivity and reducing their design, development and manufacturing costs.Our strategy is to provide the technology necessary for our customers to develop products across a variety of vertical markets including consumer, hyperscale computing, mobile, 5G communications, automotive, aerospace and defense, industrial, healthcare and life sciences. Our products and services enable our customers to develop complex and innovative electronic products, so demand for our technology is driven by our customers’ investment in new designs and products. Historically, the industry that provided the tools used by IC engineers was referred to as Electronic Design Automation (“EDA”). Today, our offerings include and extend beyond EDA.We group our products into categories related to major design activities:•Custom IC Design and Simulation;•Digital IC Design and Signoff;•Functional Verification;•IP; and•System Design and Analysis.For additional information about our products, see the discussion in Item 1, “Business,” under the heading “Products and Product Categories,” in our Annual Report.Management uses certain performance indicators to manage our business, including revenue, certain elements of operating expenses and cash flow from operations, and we describe these items further below under the headings “Results of Operations” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
In fiscal 2022, our Board of Directors approved a change in our fiscal year end from the Saturday closest to December 31 of each year to December 31 of each year. The fiscal year change became effective beginning with our 2023 fiscal year, which began on January 1, 2023. Our fiscal quarters now end on March 31, June 30, and September 30.
Our business is subject to the effects of expanded trade restrictions, the ongoing geopolitical conflict in Ukraine and other areas of the world, the COVID-19 pandemic, volatility in foreign currency exchange rates, global inflation and the rise in interest rates. We have been impacted by expanded trade restrictions, including restrictions concerning advanced node IC production in China, the inclusion of additional Chinese technology companies on the Bureau of Industry and Security (“BIS”) “Unverified List” and regulations governing the sale of certain technologies. Based on our current assessments, we expect the impact of these expanded trade restrictions on our business to be limited. We also continuously monitor geopolitical conflicts around the world and their effects on our business. During the first half of fiscal 2022, due to the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine and the corresponding sanctions imposed by the United States and other countries, we terminated our operations in Russia. The termination of our operations in Russia has not limited our ability to develop or support our products and has not had a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity or cash flows. We do not have operations or employees in Ukraine.Since its inception, the COVID-19 pandemic has posed a variety of challenges to our day-to-day operations. Despite these challenges, the pandemic has not had a material, adverse impact on our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity or cash flows. While we are unable to accurately predict the full impact that COVID-19 and its continuing repercussions will have on our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows, we have implemented policies and practices that have enabled us to support critical operations and execute our strategy. While our business model provides some resilience against these factors, we will continue to monitor the direct and indirect impacts of these or similar circumstances on our business and financial results. For additional information on the potential impact of macroeconomic conditions on our business, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” in our Annual Report and the "Risk Factors" section in this Quarterly Report.
In preparing our condensed consolidated financial statements, we make assumptions, judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on our revenue, operating income and net income, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on our condensed consolidated balance sheets. We base our assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. At least quarterly, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates, and make changes as deemed necessary.For additional information about our critical accounting estimates, see the discussion in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” under the heading “Critical Accounting Estimates” in our Annual Report.
Financial results for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, reflect the following:•Growth in revenue from emulation and prototyping hardware where revenue is recognized up-front;•Increased revenue from software and other arrangements where revenue is recognized over time; and•Continued investment in research and development activities and technical sales support.
We primarily generate revenue from licensing our software and IP, selling or leasing our emulation and prototyping hardware technology, providing maintenance for our software, hardware and IP, providing engineering services and earning royalties generated from the use of our IP. The timing of our revenue is significantly affected by the mix of software, hardware and IP products generating revenue in any given period and whether the revenue is recognized over time or at a point in time, upon completion of delivery.Approximately 85% of our annual revenue is characterized as recurring revenue. Recurring revenue includes revenue recognized over time from our software arrangements, services, royalties, maintenance on IP licenses and hardware, and operating leases of hardware. Recurring revenue also includes revenue recognized at varying points in time over the term of other arrangements with non-cancelable commitments, whereby the customer commits to a fixed dollar amount over a specified period of time that can be used to purchase from a list of products or services. The remainder of our revenue is recognized at a point in time and is characterized as up-front revenue. Up-front revenue is primarily generated by our sales of emulation and prototyping hardware and individual IP licenses. The percentage of our recurring and up-front revenue and fluctuations in revenue within our geographies are impacted by delivery of hardware and IP products to our customers in any single fiscal period. The following table shows the percentage of our revenue that is classified as recurring or up-front for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and April 2, 2022:
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, up-front revenue as a percentage of total revenue increased primarily due to growth in hardware revenue driven by increased production capacity and our ability to address long lead times resulting from continued customer demand. While the percentage of revenue characterized as recurring compared to revenue characterized as up-front may vary between fiscal quarters, the overall mix of revenue is relatively consistent on an annual basis or over the course of twelve consecutive months. The following table shows the percentage of recurring revenue for the twelve-month periods ending concurrently with our five most recent fiscal quarters:
The following table shows our revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and April 2, 2022 and the change in revenue between periods:
Product and maintenance revenue growth during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, was primarily due to our customers continuing to invest in new, complex designs for their products that include the design of electronic systems for consumer, hyperscale computing, mobile, 5G communications, automotive, aerospace and defense, industrial and healthcare. Services revenue may fluctuate from period to period based on the timing of fulfillment of our services and IP performance obligations.No single customer accounted for 10% or more of total revenue during the three months ended March 31, 2023 or April 2, 2022.
The following table shows the percentage of revenue contributed by each of our five product categories and services for the past five consecutive quarters:
Revenue by product category fluctuates from period to period based on demand for our products and services, our available resources and our ability to deliver and support them. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, revenue contributed by Functional Verification, including Emulation and Prototyping Hardware, increased as a percentage of total revenue, primarily due to increased production capacity and our ability to address long lead times resulting from continued customer demand.Certain of our licensing arrangements allow customers the ability to remix among software products. Additionally, we have arrangements with customers that include a combination of our products, with the actual product selection and number of licensed users to be determined at a later date. For these arrangements, we estimate the allocation of the revenue to product categories based upon the expected usage of our products. The actual usage of our products by these customers may differ and, if that proves to be the case, the revenue allocation in the table above would differ.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, revenue growth in the United States and China was primarily due to increased hardware revenue driven by increased production capacity and our ability to address long lead times resulting from continued customer demand.In addition, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, each of our six geographies experienced growth in revenue from our software offerings.
Most of our revenue is transacted in the United States dollar. However, certain revenue transactions are denominated in foreign currencies. For an additional description of how changes in foreign exchange rates affect our condensed consolidated financial statements, see the discussion under Item 3, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk – Foreign Currency Risk.”
The following tables show our cost of revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and April 2, 2022 and the change in cost of revenue between periods:
Cost of product and maintenance includes costs associated with the sale and lease of our emulation and prototyping hardware and licensing of our software and IP products, certain employee salary and benefits and other employee-related costs, cost of our customer support services, amortization of technology-related and maintenance-related acquired intangibles, costs of technical documentation and royalties payable to third-party vendors. Cost of product and maintenance depends primarily on our hardware product sales in any given period, but is also affected by employee salary and benefits and other employee-related costs, reserves for inventory, and the timing and extent to which we acquire intangible assets, license third-party technology or IP, and sell our products that include such acquired or licensed technology or IP.A summary of cost of product and maintenance is as follows:
The changes in product and maintenance-related costs for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, were due to the following:
Costs associated with our emulation and prototyping hardware products include components, assembly, testing, applicable reserves and overhead. These costs make our cost of emulation and prototyping hardware products higher, as a percentage of revenue, than our cost of software and IP products. Emulation and prototyping hardware costs increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to increased revenue from emulation and prototyping hardware products. Amortization of acquired intangibles included in cost of product and maintenance decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to certain technology-related intangible assets becoming fully amortized during fiscal 2022, partially offset by technology-related intangible assets acquired during fiscal 2022.
Cost of services primarily includes employee salary, benefits and other employee-related costs to perform work on revenue-generating projects and costs to maintain the infrastructure necessary to manage a services organization. Cost of services may fluctuate from period to period based on our utilization of design services engineers on revenue-generating projects rather than internal development projects.
Our operating expenses include marketing and sales, research and development, and general and administrative expenses. Factors that tend to cause our operating expenses to fluctuate include changes in the number of employees due to hiring and acquisitions, our annual mid-year promotion and pay raise cycle, stock-based compensation, foreign exchange rate movements, acquisition-related costs, volatility in variable compensation programs that are driven by operating results, and charitable donations. Many of our operating expenses are transacted in various foreign currencies. We recognize lower expenses in periods when the United States dollar strengthens in value against other currencies and we recognize higher expenses when the United States dollar weakens against other currencies. For an additional description of how changes in foreign exchange rates affect our condensed consolidated financial statements, see the discussion in Item 3, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk – Foreign Currency Risk.”Our operating expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and April 2, 2022 were as follows:
Our operating expenses, as a percentage of total revenue, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and April 2, 2022 were as follows:
The increase in marketing and sales expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, was due to the following:
Salary, benefits and other employee-related costs and stock-based compensation included in marketing and sales expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to our continued investment in attracting and retaining talent dedicated to technical sales support, including additional headcount from the acquisitions completed in fiscal 2022. Costs related to marketing programs and events, travel and sales meetings increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to an increased number of in-person meetings and events.
The increase in research and development expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, was due to the following:
Salary, benefits and other employee-related costs and stock-based compensation included in research and development expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to our continued investment in attracting and retaining talent for research and development activities, including additional headcount from the acquisitions completed in fiscal 2022. Facilities and other infrastructure costs included in research and development expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to our growing workforce.
The increase in general and administrative expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, was due to the following:
Professional services included in general and administrative expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to an increase legal and other outside service costs incurred. Salary, benefits and other employee-related costs and stock-based compensation included in general and administrative expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to additional headcount. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, contributions to non-profit organization decreased, primarily due to the timing of our periodic contributions to support charitable initiatives, including the Cadence Giving Foundation. Also during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, we benefited from a non-recurring foreign service tax refund, offsetting the increase in other categories of general and administrative expense.
Operating margin represents income from operations as a percentage of total revenue. Our operating margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023, and the three months ended April 2, 2022 was as follows:Three Months EndedMarch 31,2023April 2,2022Operating margin32 %35 %Operating margin decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to the mix of products and services sold during each respective period. In addition, our fiscal 2022 acquisitions resulted in incremental expenses that exceeded incremental revenue during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
Interest expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to borrowings under our 2025 Term Loan. For additional information relating to our debt arrangements, see Note 4 in the notes to condensed consolidated financial statements.
The following table presents the provision for income taxes and the effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and April 2, 2022:
Our provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily attributable to federal, state and foreign income taxes on our anticipated fiscal 2023 income. We also recognized tax benefits of $16.9 million related to stock-based compensation that vested or was exercised during the period. Our provision for income taxes for the three months ended April 2, 2022 was primarily attributable to federal, state and foreign income taxes on our then anticipated fiscal 2022 income, partially offset by the tax benefit of $24.3 million related to stock-based compensation that vested or was exercised during the period.Our future effective tax rates may also be materially impacted by tax amounts associated with our foreign earnings at rates different from the United States federal statutory rate, research credits, the tax impact of stock-based compensation, accounting for uncertain tax positions, business combinations, closure of statutes of limitations or settlement of tax audits and changes in tax law. A significant amount of our foreign earnings is generated by our subsidiaries organized in Ireland and Hungary. Our future effective tax rates may be adversely affected if our earnings were to be lower in countries where we have lower statutory tax rates. We currently expect that our fiscal 2023 effective tax rate will be approximately 26%. We expect that our quarterly effective tax rates will vary from our fiscal 2023 effective tax rate as a result of recognizing the income tax effects of stock-based awards in the quarterly periods that the awards vest or are settled and other items that we cannot anticipate. For additional discussion about how our effective tax rate could be affected by various risks, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” in our Annual Report.
As of March 31, 2023, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of approximately $917.0 million of cash and cash equivalents as compared to $882.3 million as of December 31, 2022.Our primary sources of cash and cash equivalents during the three months ended March 31, 2023 were cash generated from operations, proceeds from the issuance of common stock resulting from stock purchases under our employee stock purchase plan and stock options exercised during the period, and proceeds from our revolving credit facility.Our primary uses of cash and cash equivalents during the three months ended March 31, 2023 were payments related to employee salaries and benefits, operating expenses, repurchases of our common stock, payments on our revolving credit facility, payment of employee taxes on vesting of restricted stock, payments for taxes, purchases of property, plant and equipment, and purchases of investments. Approximately 73% of our cash and cash equivalents were held by our foreign subsidiaries as of March 31, 2023. Our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries may vary from period to period due to the timing of collections and repatriation of foreign earnings. We expect that current cash and cash equivalent balances and cash flows that are generated from operations and financing activities will be sufficient to meet the needs of our domestic and international operating activities and other capital and liquidity requirements, including acquisitions, investments and share repurchases, for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.
Net working capital is comprised of current assets less current liabilities, as shown on our condensed consolidated balance sheets. The increase in our net working capital as of March 31, 2023, as compared to December 31, 2022, is primarily due to the timing of cash receipts from customers and disbursements made to for operating and financing activities.
Three Months Ended March 31,2023April 2,2022Change(In millions)Cash provided by operating activities$267.4 $336.6 $(69.2)
Cash flows from operating activities include net income, adjusted for certain non-cash items, as well as changes in the balances of certain assets and liabilities. Our cash flows provided by operating activities are significantly influenced by business levels and the payment terms set forth in our customer agreements. The decrease in cash flows from operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, was primarily due to the timing of cash receipts from customers and cash disbursements, including cash paid for taxes.
Three Months Ended March 31,2023April 2,2022Change(In millions)Cash used for investing activities$(35.7)$(19.9)$(15.8)Cash used for investing activities increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to increases in payments for investments and purchases of property, plant and equipment. We expect to continue our investing activities, including purchasing property, plant and equipment, purchasing intangible assets, acquiring other companies and businesses, purchasing software licenses, and making investments.
Three Months Ended March 31,2023April 2,2022Change(In millions)Cash used for financing activities$(197.4)$(260.7)$63.3
Cash used for financing activities decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the three months ended April 2, 2022, primarily due to a decrease in payments for repurchases of our common stock, partially offset by an increase in payments on borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
In August 2022, our Board of Directors increased the prior authorization to repurchase shares of our common stock by authorizing an additional $1.0 billion. The actual timing and amount of repurchases are subject to business and market conditions, corporate and regulatory requirements, stock price, acquisition opportunities and other factors. As of March 31, 2023, approximately $952.0 million of the share repurchase authorization remained available to repurchase shares of our common stock. See Part II, Item 2, “Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds” for additional information on share repurchases.
In June 2021, we entered into a five-year senior unsecured revolving credit facility with a group of lenders led by Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, as amended in September 2022 (the “2021 Credit Facility”). The 2021 Credit Facility provides for borrowings up to $700.0 million, with the right to request increased capacity up to an additional $350.0 million upon receipt of lender commitments, for total maximum borrowings of $1.05 billion. The 2021 Credit Facility expires on June 30, 2026. Any outstanding loans drawn under the 2021 Credit Facility are due at maturity on June 30, 2026, subject to an option to extend the maturity date. Outstanding borrowings may be repaid at any time prior to maturity. Interest rates associated with the 2021 Credit Facility are variable, so interest expense is impacted by changes in the interest rates, particularly for periods when there are outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility. As of March 31, 2023, there were $30.0 million of borrowings outstanding under the 2021 Credit Facility, and we were in compliance with all financial covenants associated with such credit facility.
In October 2014, we issued a $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.375% Senior Notes due October 15, 2024 (the “2024 Notes”). We received net proceeds of $342.4 million from the issuance of the 2024 Notes, net of a discount of $1.4 million and issuance costs of $6.2 million. Interest is payable in cash semi-annually. The 2024 Notes are unsecured and rank equal in right of payment to all of our existing and future senior indebtedness. As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all covenants associated with the 2024 Notes.
In September 2022, we entered into a $300.0 million three-year senior non-amortizing term loan facility due on September 7, 2025 with a group of lenders led by Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent (the “2025 Term Loan”). The 2025 Term Loan is unsecured and ranks equal in right of payment to all of our unsecured indebtedness. Interest rates associated with the 2025 Term Loan are variable, so interest expense is impacted by changes in interest rates. As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all financial covenants associated with the 2025 Term Loan.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, there were no material changes to our other liquidity requirements as reported in Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” in our Annual Report.