
Regulatory Proceedings. On January 4, 2023, the IURC issued an order authorizing the issuance of up to $350 million in bonds to securitize qualified costs associated with CenterPoint Energy’s planned retirements of coal generation facilities. CenterPoint Energy determined that the retirement of property, plant and equipment became probable upon the issuance of the order and reclassified property, plant and equipment of $257 million to be recovered through securitization to a regulatory asset during the three months ended March 31, 2023. Such amounts will continue to earn a full return until recovered through securitization. On March 24, 2023, SIGECO and the Securitization Subsidiary filed a registration statement on Form SF-1 under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, with the SEC registering the public offering and sale of up to $350 million aggregate principal amount of the Securitization Subsidiary Securitization Bonds. The registration statement has not yet become effective, and the securities may not be sold nor may offers to buy be accepted prior to the time the registration statement becomes effective. On March 23, 2023, CenterPoint Energy and CERC, collectively, received approximately $1.1 billion in proceeds from the customer rate relief bonds issued by the Texas Public Financing Authority related to the February 2021 Winter Storm Event. On April 5, 2023 a final order was issued approving the $39 million revenue requirement from Houston Electric’s 2021 investment in TEEEF. On April 5, 2023, Houston Electric filed its second TEEEF filing requesting recovery of $188 million of TEEEF related costs incurred through December 31, 2022. For further information, see Note 6 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements. For information related to our pending and completed regulatory proceedings to date in 2023, see “—Liquidity and Capital Resources —Regulatory Matters” below.Debt Transactions. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, CenterPoint Energy issued or borrowed a combined $3.03 billion in new debt, including Houston Electric’s issuance of $900 million aggregate principal amount of general mortgage bonds, CERC’s issuance of $1.2 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes, CERC’s $500 million term loan, SIGECO’s issuance of $180 million aggregate principal amount of first mortgage bonds and CenterPoint Energy’s $250 million term loan. CenterPoint Energy repaid or redeemed a combined $2.04 billion of debt, including CERC’s repayment of its $500 million term loan and $1,275 million of senior notes maturing in 2023, CenterPoint Energy’s repayment of its $250 million term loan and SIGECO’s early redemption of $11 million of first mortgage bonds maturing in 2044, excluding scheduled principal payments on Securitization Bonds. For information about debt transactions to date in 2023, see Note 11 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements. CenterPoint Energy Leadership Transition. On March 15, 2023, CenterPoint Energy announced the appointment of  Christopher Foster to the position of Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, effective May 5, 2023.
For information regarding factors that may affect the future results of our consolidated operations, please read “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K and in Item 1A of Part II of this combined Form 10-Q.Income available to common shareholders for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was as follows:
(1)Includes energy performance contracting and sustainable infrastructure services through Energy Systems Group, unallocated corporate costs, interest income and interest expense, intercompany eliminations and the reduction of income allocated to preferred shareholders.
Income available to common shareholders decreased $205 million primarily due to the following items: •an increase in income available to common shareholders of $41 million for the Electric reportable segment, as further discussed below;•a decrease in income available to common shareholders of $164 million for the Natural Gas reportable segment, as further discussed below;•a decrease in income available to common shareholders of $82 million for Corporate and Other, primarily due to the pre-tax net gain of $86 million on the sale of Energy Transfer equity securities in 2022 further discussed in Note 10 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements, partially offset by $45 million of costs associated with early redemption of long-term debt in first quarter 2022. The remaining variance is due largely to an approximately $25 million increase in borrowing costs due to higher interest rates, partially offset by income tax expense discussed below.Income Tax Expense.  For a discussion of effective tax rate per period, see Note 12 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
CenterPoint Energy’s CODM views net income as the measure of profit or loss for the reportable segments. Segment results include inter-segment interest income and expense, which may result in inter-segment profit and loss. The following discussion of CenterPoint Energy’s results of operations is separated into two reportable segments, Electric and Natural Gas.
For information regarding factors that may affect the future results of operations of CenterPoint Energy’s Electric reportable segment, please read “Risk Factors — Risk Factors Affecting Operations - Electric Generation, Transmission and Distribution,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Regulatory, Environmental and Legal Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Financial, Economic and Market Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Safety and Security Risks” and “— General and Other Risks” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K.The following table provides summary data of the Electric reportable segment:
The following table provides variance explanations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to three months ended March 31, 2022 by major income statement caption for the Electric reportable segment:
Income Tax Expense.  For a discussion of effective tax rate per period by Registrant, see Note 12 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
For information regarding factors that may affect the future results of operations of CenterPoint Energy’s Natural Gas reportable segment, please read “Risk Factors — Risk Factors Affecting Operations - Natural Gas,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Regulatory, Environmental and Legal Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Financial, Economic and Market Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Safety and Security Risks” and “— General and Other Risks” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K.The following table provides summary data of CenterPoint Energy’s Natural Gas reportable segment:
The following table provides variance explanations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to three months ended March 31, 2022 by major income statement caption for the Natural Gas reportable segment:
Income Tax Expense.  For a discussion of effective tax rate per period by Registrant, see Note 12 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
Houston Electric’s CODM views net income as the measure of profit or loss for its single reportable segment. Houston Electric’s results of operations are affected by seasonal fluctuations in the demand for electricity. Houston Electric’s results of operations are also affected by, among other things, the actions of various governmental authorities having jurisdiction over rates Houston Electric charges, debt service costs, income tax expense, Houston Electric’s ability to collect receivables from REPs and Houston Electric’s ability to recover its regulatory assets. For more information regarding factors that may affect the future results of operations of Houston Electric’s business, please read “Risk Factors — Risk Factors Affecting Operations - Electric Generation, Transmission and Distribution,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Regulatory, Environmental and Legal Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Financial, Economic and Market Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Safety and Security Risks” and “— General and Other Risks” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K.
The following table provides variance explanations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to three months ended March 31, 2022 by major income statement caption for Houston Electric:
Income Tax Expense.  For a discussion of effective tax rate per period, see Note 12 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
CERC’s CODM views net income as the measure of profit or loss for its single reportable segment. CERC’s results of operations are affected by seasonal fluctuations in the demand for natural gas. CERC’s results of operations are also affected by, among other things, the actions of various federal, state and local governmental authorities having jurisdiction over rates CERC charges, debt service costs and income tax expense, CERC’s ability to collect receivables from customers and CERC’s ability to recover its regulatory assets. As a result of the Restructuring further discussed in Note 1 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements, prior year amounts have been recast. For more information regarding factors that may affect the future results of operations for CERC’s business, please read “Risk Factors — Risk Factors Affecting Operations - Natural Gas,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Regulatory, Environmental and Legal Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Financial, Economic and Market Risks,” “— Risk Factors Affecting Safety and Security Risks” and “— General and Other Risks” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K.
The following table provides variance explanations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to three months ended March 31, 2022 by major income statement caption for CERC:
Income Tax Expense.  For a discussion of effective tax rate per period, see Note 12 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
For information on other developments, factors and trends that may have an impact on the Registrants’ future earnings, please read “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Certain Factors Affecting Future Earnings” in Item 7 of Part II and “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K, in Item 1A of Part II of this combined Form 10-Q  and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information” in this combined Form 10-Q.
As a result of the Restructuring further discussed in Note 1 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements, prior year amounts for CERC have been recast. The following table summarizes the net cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Operating Activities. The following items contributed to increased (decreased) net cash provided by operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022:
(1)This change is primarily related to the receipt of the Texas securitization proceeds at CenterPoint Energy and CERC.  For further details, see Note 6 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.Investing Activities. The following items contributed to (increased) decreased net cash used in investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022:
Financing Activities. The following items contributed to (increased) decreased net cash used in financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022:
The liquidity and capital requirements of the Registrants are affected primarily by results of operations, capital expenditures, debt service requirements, tax payments, working capital needs and various regulatory actions. Capital expenditures are expected to be used for investment in infrastructure. These capital expenditures are anticipated to maintain reliability and safety, increase resiliency and expand our systems through value-added projects. In addition to dividend payments on CenterPoint Energy’s Series A Preferred Stock and Common Stock and interest payments on debt, the Registrants’ principal anticipated cash requirements for the remaining nine months of 2023 include the following:
The Registrants expect that anticipated cash needs for the remaining nine months of 2023 will be met with borrowings under their credit facilities, proceeds from the issuance of long-term debt, term loans, anticipated cash flows from operations, and, with respect to CenterPoint Energy and CERC, proceeds from commercial paper. Discretionary financing or refinancing may result in the issuance of debt securities of the Registrants in the capital markets or the arrangement of additional credit facilities or term bank loans. Issuances of debt in the capital markets, funds raised in the commercial paper markets and additional credit facilities may not, however, be available on acceptable terms.
Other than Houston Electric’s general mortgage bonds issued as collateral for tax-exempt long-term debt of CenterPoint Energy as discussed in Note 11 and guarantees as discussed in Note 13(b) to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
For further information about the February 2021 Winter Storm Event, see Note 6 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
For further information about the Indiana Electric Securitization, see Note 6 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
On February 23, 2021, Indiana Electric filed a CPCN with the IURC seeking approval to purchase the Posey Solar project. On October 27, 2021, the IURC issued an order approving the CPCN, authorizing Indiana Electric to purchase the Posey Solar project through a BTA to acquire its solar array assets for a fixed purchase price and approved recovery of costs via a levelized rate over the anticipated 35-year life.  Due to community feedback and rising project costs caused by inflation and supply chain issues affecting the energy industry, Indiana Electric, along with Arevon, the developer, announced plans in January 2022 to downsize the Posey Solar project to 191 MW. Indiana Electric collaboratively agreed to the scope change, and on February 1, 2023, Indiana Electric entered into an amended and restated BTA that is contingent on further IURC review and approval.  On February 7, 2023, Indiana Electric filed a CPCN with the IURC to approve the amended BTA.  With the passage of the IRA, Indiana Electric can now pursue PTCs for solar projects.  Indiana Electric will request that project costs, net of PTCs, be recovered in rate base rather than a levelized rate, through base rates or the CECA mechanism, depending on which provides more timely recovery.  The Posey Solar project is expected to be placed in service in 2025.On July 5, 2022, Indiana Electric entered into a BTA to acquire a 130 MW solar array in Pike County, Indiana through a special purpose entity for a capped purchase price. A CPCN for the project was filed with the IURC on July 29, 2022.  On September 21, 2022, an agreement in principle was reached resolving all the issues between Indiana Electric and OUCC.  The Stipulation and Settlement agreement was filed on October 6, 2022 and a settlement hearing was held on November 1, 2022.  On January 11, 2023, the IURC issued an order approving the settlement agreement granting Indiana Electric to purchase and acquire the Pike County solar project through a BTA and approved the estimated cost. The IURC also designated the project as a clean energy project under Ind. Code Ch. 8-1-8.8, approved the proposed levelized rate and associated ratemaking and accounting treatment.  The project is expected to be placed in service by the first quarter of 2025.On January 10, 2023, Indiana Electric filed a CPCN with the IURC to acquire a wind energy generating facility through a BTA, consistent with its 2019/2020 IRP that calls for up to 300 MWs of wind generation.  The wind project is located in MISO’s Central Region. Commercial operation is expected in 2025. Indiana Electric has requested recovery via the CECA mechanism or through base rates in the next general rate case, depending on which provides more timely recovery. As of the date of the filing of this Form 10-Q, Indiana Electric has not entered into any definitive agreement relating to this wind energy generating facility, and it is not certain that a definitive agreement will be entered into at all.
Indiana Electric also sought approval in February 2021 for a 100 MW solar PPA with Clenera LLC in Warrick County, Indiana. The request accounted for increased cost of debt related to this PPA, which provides equivalent equity return to offset imputed debt during the 25 year life of the PPA.  In October 2021, the IURC approved the Warrick County solar PPA but denied the request to preemptively offset imputed debt in the PPA cost.  Due to rising project costs caused by inflation and supply chain issues affecting the energy industry, Clenera and Indiana Electric were compelled to renegotiate terms of the agreement to increase the PPA price. On January 17, 2023, Indiana Electric filed a request with the IURC to amend the previously approved PPA with certain modifications. Revised purchase power costs are requested to be recovered through the fuel adjustment clause proceedings over the term of the amended PPA. The amended PPA will be brought before the IURC in a fully docketed proceeding in the second quarter of 2023. The Clenera solar array is expected to be placed in service in the second quarter of 2025.On August 25, 2021, Indiana Electric filed with the IURC seeking approval to purchase 185 MW of solar power, under a 15-year PPA, from Oriden, which is developing a solar project in Vermillion County, Indiana, and 150 MW of solar power, under a 20-year PPA, from Origis, which is developing a solar project in Knox County, Indiana. On May 4, 2022, the IURC issued an order approving Indiana Electric to enter into both PPAs. In March 2022, when the results of the MISO interconnection study were completed, Origis advised Indiana Electric that the costs to construct the solar project in Knox County, Indiana had increased. The increase was largely driven by escalating commodity and supply chain costs impacting manufacturers worldwide. In August 2022, Indiana Electric and Origis entered into an amended PPA, which reiterated the terms contained in the 2021 PPA with certain modifications. On October 19, 2022, Indiana Electric filed with the IURC seeking approval of the amended PPA with Origis and a hearing was held on January 4, 2023.  On February 22, 2023, the IURC issued an order authorizing CEI South to (i) enter into the amended PPA with Origis; (ii) recover the cost of the amended PPA over its full term as proposed; and (iii) use the proposed ratemaking treatment. On January 17, 2023, Indiana Electric filed a request with the IURC to amend the previously approved PPA with Oriden with certain modifications. Revised purchase power costs are requested to be recovered through the fuel adjustment clause proceedings over the term of the amended PPA with Oriden. The amended PPA with Oriden will be brought before the IURC in a fully docketed proceeding in the second quarter of 2023 and an order is anticipated to be issued by the third quarter of 2023. The Oriden solar array is expected to be placed in service in the second quarter of 2025 and the Origis solar array is expected to be placed in service by the third quarter of 2024.
On June 17, 2021, Indiana Electric filed a CPCN with the IURC seeking approval to construct two natural gas combustion turbines to replace portions of its existing coal-fired generation fleet. On June 28, 2022, the IURC approved the CPCN. The estimated $334 million turbine facility is planned to be constructed at the current site of the A.B. Brown power plant in Posey County, Indiana and would provide a combined output of 460 MW.  Indiana Electric received approval for depreciation expense and post in-service carrying costs to be deferred in a regulatory asset until the date Indiana South’s base rates include a return on and recovery of depreciation expense on the facility. A new approximately 23.5 mile pipeline will be constructed and operated by Texas Gas Transmission, LLC to supply natural gas to the turbine facility. FERC granted a certificate to construct the pipeline on October 20, 2022. A party to the proceeding filed a petition for review of FERC’s order with the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia on February 21, 2023. Indiana Electric granted its contractor a full notice to proceed to construct the turbines on December 9, 2022. The facility is targeted to be operational by year end 2025. Recovery of the proposed natural gas combustion turbines and regulatory asset will be requested in the next Indiana Electric rate case expected in 2023.
In June 2022, F.B. Culley Unit 3, an Indiana Electric coal-fired electric generation unit with an installed generating capacity of 270 MW, experienced an operating issue relating to its boiler feed pump turbine. The unit returned to service in March 2023.
On December 17, 2020, Houston Electric filed a certificate of convenience and necessity application with the PUCT for approval to build a 345 kV transmission line in Wharton County, Texas connecting the Hillje substation on Houston Electric’s transmission system to the planned 610 MW Space City Solar Generation facility being developed by third-party developer EDF Renewables.  The actual capital costs of the project will depend on actual land acquisition costs, construction costs, and other factors. In November 2021, the PUCT approved a route that was estimated to cost $25 million and issued a final order on January 12, 2022. There have been project delays due to supply chain constraints in the developer acquiring solar panels. Houston Electric expects to complete construction and the transmission line will be ready to be energized by the end of 2023.
Houston Electric continues to review the effects of legislation passed in 2021 and will be reviewing proposed bills that have been submitted during the current 2023 legislative session as applicable.  For example, pursuant to legislation passed in 2021, Houston Electric entered into two leases for TEEEF (mobile generation). Additionally, the 2021 legislation allows Houston Electric to seek recovery of transmission and distribution facilities that have a lead time of at least six months and would aid in restoring power to Houston Electric’s distribution customers following certain widespread power outages. Houston Electric plans to seek recovery of costs associated with long-lead time facilities in a future DCRF or ratemaking proceeding.   For additional information, see Note 6 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
The Natural Gas Innovation Act was passed by the Minnesota legislature in June 2021 with bipartisan support. This law establishes a regulatory framework to enable the state’s investor-owned natural gas utilities to provide customers with access to renewable energy resources and innovative technologies, with the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and advancing the state’s clean energy future. Specifically, the Natural Gas Innovation Act allows a natural gas utility to submit an innovation plan for approval by the MPUC which could propose the use of renewable energy resources and innovative technologies such as:•renewable natural gas (produces energy from organic materials such as wastewater, agricultural manure, food waste, agricultural or forest waste);•renewable hydrogen gas (produces energy from water through electrolysis with renewable electricity such as solar);•energy efficiency measures (avoids energy consumption in excess of the utility’s existing conservation programs); and •innovative technologies (reduces or avoids greenhouse gas emissions using technologies such as carbon capture).CERC expects to submit its first innovation plan to the MPUC in 2023. The maximum allowable cost for an innovation plan will start at 1.75% of the utility's revenue in the state and could increase to 4% by 2033, subject to review and approval by the MPUC.
CenterPoint Energy’s current and future solar projects have been impacted by delays and/or increased costs.  The delays and inflationary cost pressures communicated from the developers of our solar projects are primarily due to (i) unavailability of solar panels and other uncertainties related to the pending DOC investigation on anti-dumping and countervailing duties petition filed by a domestic solar manufacturer, (ii) the December 2021 Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act on solar modules and other products manufactured in China's Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region and (iii) persistent general global supply chain and labor availability issues. On December 2, 2022, the DOC issued its preliminary determination, finding four of the eight companies being investigated are attempting to bypass U.S. duties; however, the investigation continues with the DOC’s final determination expected in May 2023. In June 2022, President Biden authorized an executive order which would suspend anti-circumvention tariffs on solar panels for two years; however, the executive order could be subject to legal and legislative challenges and its effects remain uncertain.  The resolution of these issues will determine what additional costs or delays our solar projects will be subject to. These impacts have resulted in cost increases for certain projects, and may result in cost increases in other projects, and such impacts have resulted in, or are expected to result in, the need for us to seek additional regulatory review and approvals. Additionally, significant changes to project costs and schedules as a result of these factors could impact the viability of the projects. For more information regarding potential delays, cancellations and supply chain disruptions, see “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in the Registrants’ 2022 Form 10-K.
The Registrants are routinely involved in rate change applications before state regulatory authorities. Those applications include general rate cases, where the entire cost of service of the utility is assessed and reset. In addition, Registrants are periodically involved in proceedings to adjust its capital tracking mechanisms (e.g., CSIA, DCRF, DRR, GRIP, TCOS and TDSIC), its cost of service adjustments (e.g., RSP and RRA), its decoupling mechanism (e.g., Decoupling and SRC), and its energy efficiency cost trackers (e.g., CIP, DSMA, EECR, EECRF, EEFC and EEFR). The table below reflects significant applications pending or completed since the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K was filed with the SEC through the date of the filing of this Form 10-Q.
(1)Represents proposed increases (decreases) when effective date and/or approval date is not yet determined. Approved rates could differ materially from proposed rates.
On August 16, 2022, the IRA was signed into law. The new law extends or creates tax-related energy incentives for solar, wind and alternative clean energy sources, implements, subject to certain exceptions, a 1% tax on share repurchases after December 31, 2022, and implements a 15% corporate alternative minimum tax based on the AFSI of those corporations with an average AFSI of $1 billion over the most recent three-year period (i.e., the CAMT). The IRA did not have a material impact on the Registrants’ 2022 financial results and no material impact is expected for 2023 financial results. The Registrants may be currently subject to the CAMT, pending future guidance relating to comments requested in response to Notice 2023-7. If the Registrants are subject to the CAMT for 2023, the calculation of regular tax will exceed minimum tax for 2023; therefore, no minimum tax is expected to be paid. Further guidance on the tax provisions of the IRA is expected and the Registrants continue to evaluate the IRA provisions for the effect on their future financial results.
On August 3, 2015, the EPA released its CPP rule, which required a 32% reduction in carbon emissions from 2005 levels. The final rule was published in the Federal Register on October 23, 2015, and that action was immediately followed by litigation ultimately resulting in the U.S. Supreme Court staying implementation of the rule. On July 8, 2019, the EPA published the ACE rule, which (i) repealed the CPP rule; (ii) replaced the CPP rule with a program that requires states to implement a program of energy efficiency improvement targets for individual coal-fired electric generating units; and (iii) amended the implementing regulations for Section 111(d) of the Clean Air Act. On January 19, 2021, the majority of the ACE rule — including the CPP repeal, CPP replacement, and the timing-related portions of the Section 111(d) implementing rule — was struck down by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit and on October 29, 2021, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to consider four petitions filed by various coal interests and a coalition of 19 states.  On June 30, 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the EPA exceeded its authority in promulgating the CPP.  The EPA has announced it plans on issuing new greenhouse gas rules in the future. The Biden administration recommitted the United States to the Paris Agreement, which can be expected to drive a renewed regulatory push to require further GHG emission reductions from the energy sector and proceeded to lead negotiations at the global climate conference in Glasgow, Scotland. On April 22, 2021, President Biden announced new goals of 50% reduction of economy-wide GHG emissions, and 100% carbon-free electricity by 2035, which formed the basis of the U.S. commitments announced in Glasgow. In September 2021, CenterPoint Energy announced its net zero emissions goals for both Scope 1 and certain Scope 2 emissions by 2035 as well as a goal to reduce certain Scope 3 emissions by 20% to 30% by 2035. Because Texas is an unregulated market, CenterPoint Energy’s Scope 2 estimates do not take into account Texas electric transmission and distribution assets in the line loss calculation and, in addition, exclude emissions related to purchased power in Indiana between 2024 and 2026 as estimated. CenterPoint Energy’s Scope 3 estimates are based on the total natural gas supply delivered to residential and commercial customers as reported in the U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) Form EIA-176 reports and do not take into account the emissions of transport customers and emissions related to upstream extraction. These emission goals are expected to be used to position CenterPoint Energy to comply with anticipated future regulatory requirements from the current and future administrations to further reduce GHG emissions. CenterPoint Energy’s and CERC’s revenues, operating costs and capital requirements could be adversely affected as a result of any regulatory action that would require installation of new control technologies or a modification of their operations or would have the effect of reducing the consumption of natural gas. The IRA established the Methane Emissions Reduction Program, which imposes a charge on methane emissions from certain natural gas transmission facilities, and the EPA has proposed new regulations targeting reductions in methane emissions, which if implemented will increase costs related to production, transmission and storage of natural gas. Houston Electric, in contrast to some electric utilities including Indiana Electric, does not generate electricity, other than TEEEF, and thus is not directly exposed to the risk of high capital costs and regulatory uncertainties that face electric utilities that burn fossil fuels to generate electricity. CenterPoint Energy’s net zero emissions goals are aligned with Indiana Electric’s generation transition plan and are expected to position Indiana Electric to comply with anticipated future regulatory requirements related to GHG emissions reductions. Nevertheless, Houston Electric’s and Indiana Electric’s revenues could be adversely affected to the extent any resulting regulatory action has the effect of reducing consumption of electricity by ultimate consumers within their respective service territories. Likewise, incentives to conserve energy or to use energy sources other than natural gas could result in a decrease in demand for the Registrants’ services. For example, Minnesota has enacted the Natural Gas Innovation Act that seeks to provide customers with access to renewable energy resources and innovative technologies, with the goal of reducing GHG emissions. Further, certain local government bodies have introduced or are considering requirements and/or incentives to reduce energy consumption by certain specified dates. For example, Minneapolis has adopted carbon emission reduction goals in an effort to decrease reliance on fossil gas. Additionally, cities in Minnesota within CenterPoint Energy’s Natural Gas operational footprint are considering initiatives to eliminate natural gas use in buildings and focus on electrification. Also, Minnesota cities may consider seeking legislative authority for the ability to enact voluntary enhanced energy standards for all development projects. These initiatives could have a significant impact on CenterPoint Energy and its operations, and this impact could increase if other cities and jurisdictions in its service area enact similar initiatives. Further, our third party suppliers, vendors and partners may also be impacted by climate change laws and regulations, which could impact CenterPoint Energy’s business by, among other things, causing permitting and construction delays, project cancellations or increased project costs passed on to CenterPoint Energy.  Conversely, regulatory actions that effectively promote the consumption of natural gas because of its lower emissions characteristics would be expected to benefit CenterPoint Energy and CERC and their natural gas-related businesses. At this time, however, we cannot quantify the magnitude of the impacts from possible new regulatory actions related to GHG emissions, either positive or negative, on the Registrants’ businesses. Compliance costs and other effects associated with climate change, reductions in GHG emissions and obtaining renewable energy sources remain uncertain. Although the amount of compliance costs remains uncertain, any new regulation or legislation relating to climate change will likely result in an increase in compliance costs. While the requirements of a federal or state rule remain uncertain, CenterPoint Energy will continue to monitor regulatory activity regarding GHG emission standards that may affect its business. Currently, CenterPoint Energy does not purchase carbon credits. In connection with its net zero emissions goals, CenterPoint Energy is expected to purchase carbon credits in the future; however, CenterPoint Energy does not currently expect the number of credits, or cost for those credits, to be material.
As a result of increased awareness regarding climate change, coupled with adverse economic conditions, availability of alternative energy sources, including private solar, microturbines, fuel cells, energy-efficient buildings and energy storage devices, and new regulations restricting emissions, including potential regulations of methane emissions, some consumers and companies may use less energy, meet their own energy needs through alternative energy sources or avoid expansions of their facilities, including natural gas facilities, resulting in less demand for the Registrants’ services. As these technologies become a more cost-competitive option over time, whether through cost effectiveness or government incentives and subsidies, certain customers may choose to meet their own energy needs and subsequently decrease usage of the Registrants’ systems and services, which may result in, among other things, Indiana Electric’s generating facilities becoming less competitive and economical. Further, evolving investor sentiment related to the use of fossil fuels and initiatives to restrict continued production of fossil fuels have had significant impacts on CenterPoint Energy’s electric generation and natural gas businesses. For example, because Indiana Electric’s current generating facilities substantially rely on coal for their operations, certain financial institutions choose not to participate in CenterPoint Energy’s financing arrangements.  Conversely, demand for the Registrants’ services may increase as a result of customer changes in response to climate change.  For example, as the utilization of electric vehicles increases, demand for electricity may increase, resulting in increased usage of CenterPoint Energy’s systems and services.  Any negative opinions with respect to CenterPoint Energy’s environmental practices or its ability to meet the challenges posed by climate change formed by regulators, customers, investors, legislators or other stakeholders could harm its reputation.  To address these developments, CenterPoint Energy announced its net zero emissions goals for both Scope 1 and certain Scope 2 emissions by 2035.  Indiana Electric’s 2019/2020 IRP identified a preferred portfolio that retires 730 MW of coal-fired generation facilities and replaces these resources with a mix of generating resources composed primarily of renewables, including solar, wind, and solar with storage, supported by dispatchable natural gas combustion turbines including a pipeline to serve such natural gas generation. Indiana Electric continues to execute on its 2019/2020 IRP and has received initial approvals for 756 MWs of the 700-1,000 MWs identified within Indiana Electric’s 2019/2020 IRP. Additionally, as reflected in its 10-year capital plan announced in September 2021, CenterPoint Energy anticipates spending over $3 billion in clean energy investments and enablement, which may be used to support, among other things, renewable energy generation and electric vehicle expansion.  CenterPoint Energy believes its planned investments in renewable energy generation and corresponding planned reduction in its GHG emissions as part of its net zero emissions goals support global efforts to reduce the impacts of climate change. To the extent climate changes result in warmer temperatures in the Registrants’ service territories, financial results from the Registrants’ businesses could be adversely impacted. For example, CenterPoint Energy’s and CERC’s Natural Gas could be adversely affected through lower natural gas sales. On the other hand, warmer temperatures in CenterPoint Energy’s and Houston Electric’s electric service territory may increase revenues from transmission and distribution and generation through increased demand for electricity used for cooling. Another possible result of climate change is more frequent and more severe weather events, such as hurricanes, tornadoes and flooding, including such storms as the February 2021 Winter Storm Event. Since many of the Registrants’ facilities are located along or near the Texas gulf coast, increased or more severe hurricanes or tornadoes could increase costs to repair damaged facilities and restore service to customers. CenterPoint Energy’s current 10-year capital plan includes capital expenditures to maintain reliability and safety and increase resiliency of its systems as climate change may result in more frequent significant weather events. Houston Electric does not own or operate any electric generation facilities other than, since September 2021, its operation of TEEEF. Houston Electric transmits and distributes to customers of REPs electric power that the REPs obtain from power generation facilities owned by third parties. To the extent adverse weather conditions affect the Registrants’ suppliers, results from their energy delivery businesses may suffer. For example, in Texas, the February 2021 Winter Storm Event caused an electricity generation shortage that was severely disruptive to Houston Electric’s service territory and the wholesale generation market and also caused a reduction in available natural gas capacity. When the Registrants cannot deliver electricity or natural gas to customers, or customers cannot receive services, the Registrants’ financial results can be impacted by lost revenues, and they generally must seek approval from regulators to recover restoration costs. To the extent the Registrants are unable to recover those costs, or if higher rates resulting from recovery of such costs result in reduced demand for services, the Registrants’ future financial results may be adversely impacted. Further, as the intensity and frequency of significant weather events continues, it may impact our ability to secure cost-efficient insurance.
The Registrants may draw on their respective revolving credit facilities from time to time to provide funds used for general corporate and limited liability company purposes, including to backstop CenterPoint Energy’s and CERC’s commercial paper programs. The facilities may also be utilized to obtain letters of credit. For further details related to the Registrants’ revolving credit facilities, see Note 11 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.Based on the consolidated debt to capitalization covenant in the Registrants’ revolving credit facilities, the Registrants would have been permitted to utilize the full capacity of such revolving credit facilities, which aggregated approximately $4.0 billion as of March 31, 2023. As of April 19, 2023, the Registrants had the following revolving credit facilities and utilization of such facilities:
(1)This credit facility was issued by SIGECO.Borrowings under each of the revolving credit facilities are subject to customary terms and conditions. However, there is no requirement that the borrower makes representations prior to borrowing as to the absence of material adverse changes or litigation that could be expected to have a material adverse effect. Borrowings under each of the revolving credit facilities are subject to acceleration upon the occurrence of events of default that we consider customary. The revolving credit facilities also provide for customary fees, including commitment fees, administrative agent fees, fees in respect of letters of credit and other fees. In each of the revolving credit facilities, the spread to SOFR and the commitment fees fluctuate based on the borrower’s credit rating. Each of the Registrant’s credit facilities provide for a mechanism to replace SOFR with possible alternative benchmarks upon certain benchmark replacement events. The borrowers are currently in compliance with the various business and financial covenants in the four revolving credit facilities.
For detailed information about the Registrants’ debt transactions to date in 2023, see Note 11 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
On May 22, 2020, the Registrants filed a joint shelf registration statement with the SEC registering indeterminate principal amounts of Houston Electric’s general mortgage bonds, CERC Corp.’s senior debt securities and CenterPoint Energy’s senior debt securities and junior subordinated debt securities and an indeterminate number of shares of Common Stock, shares of preferred stock, depositary shares, as well as stock purchase contracts and equity units. The joint shelf registration statement will expire on May 22, 2023. For information related to the Registrants’ debt issuances in 2022, see Note 11 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
As of April 19, 2023, the Registrants had no temporary investments.
The Registrants participate in a money pool through which they and certain of their subsidiaries can borrow or invest on a short-term basis. Funding needs are aggregated and external borrowing or investing is based on the net cash position. The net funding requirements of the CenterPoint Energy money pool are expected to be met with borrowings under CenterPoint Energy’s revolving credit facility or the sale of CenterPoint Energy’s commercial paper. The net funding requirements of the CERC money pool are expected to be met with borrowings under CERC’s revolving credit facility or the sale of CERC’s commercial paper. The money pool may not provide sufficient funds to meet the Registrants’ cash needs.The table below summarizes CenterPoint Energy money pool activity by Registrant as of April 19, 2023: Weighted Average Interest RateHouston ElectricCERC (in millions)Money pool investments 5.34%$188 $191
The interest rate on borrowings under the credit facilities is based on each respective borrower’s credit ratings. As of April 19, 2023, Moody’s, S&P and Fitch had assigned the following credit ratings to the borrowers:
(1)A Moody’s rating outlook is an opinion regarding the likely direction of an issuer’s rating over the medium term.(2)An S&P outlook assesses the potential direction of a long-term credit rating over the intermediate to longer term.(3)A Fitch rating outlook indicates the direction a rating is likely to move over a one- to two-year period.The Registrants cannot assure that the ratings set forth above will remain in effect for any given period of time or that one or more of these ratings will not be lowered or withdrawn entirely by a rating agency. The Registrants note that these credit ratings are included for informational purposes and are not recommendations to buy, sell or hold the Registrants’ securities and may be revised or withdrawn at any time by the rating agency. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Any future reduction or withdrawal of one or more of the Registrants’ credit ratings could have a material adverse impact on the Registrants’ ability to obtain short- and long-term financing, the cost of such financings and the execution of the Registrants’ commercial strategies.A decline in credit ratings could increase borrowing costs under the Registrants’ revolving credit facilities. If the Registrants’ credit ratings had been downgraded one notch by S&P and Moody’s from the ratings that existed as of March 31, 2023, the impact on the borrowing costs under the three revolving credit facilities would have been insignificant. A decline in credit ratings would also increase the interest rate on long-term debt to be issued in the capital markets and could negatively impact the Registrants’ ability to complete capital market transactions and to access the commercial paper market.  Additionally, a decline in credit ratings could increase cash collateral requirements and reduce earnings of CenterPoint Energy’s and CERC’s Natural Gas reportable segments.Pipeline tariffs and contracts typically provide that if the credit ratings of a shipper or the shipper’s guarantor drop below a threshold level, which is generally investment grade ratings from both Moody’s and S&P, cash or other collateral may be demanded from the shipper in an amount equal to the sum of three months’ charges for pipeline services plus the unrecouped cost of any lateral built for such shipper. If the credit ratings of CERC Corp. decline below the applicable threshold levels, CERC might need to provide cash or other collateral of up to $240 million as of March 31, 2023. The amount of collateral will depend on seasonal variations in transportation levels.
If CenterPoint Energy’s creditworthiness were to drop such that ZENS holders thought its liquidity was adversely affected or the market for the ZENS were to become illiquid, some ZENS holders might decide to exchange their ZENS for cash. Funds for the payment of cash upon exchange could be obtained from the sale of the shares of ZENS-Related Securities that CenterPoint Energy owns or from other sources. CenterPoint Energy owns shares of ZENS-Related Securities equal to approximately 100% of the reference shares used to calculate its obligation to the holders of the ZENS. ZENS exchanges result in a cash outflow because tax deferrals related to the ZENS and shares of ZENS-Related Securities would typically cease when ZENS are exchanged or otherwise retired and shares of ZENS-Related Securities are sold. The ultimate tax liability related to the ZENS and ZENS-Related Securities continues to increase by the amount of the tax benefit realized each year, and there could be a significant cash outflow when the taxes are paid as a result of the retirement or exchange of the ZENS. If all ZENS had been exchanged for cash on March 31, 2023, deferred taxes of approximately $674 million would have been payable in 2023. If all the ZENS-Related Securities had been sold on March 31, 2023, capital gains taxes of approximately $83 million would have been payable in 2023 based on 2023 tax rates in effect. For additional information about ZENS, see Note 10 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
Under each of CenterPoint Energy’s, Houston Electric’s and CERC’s respective revolving credit facilities and CERC’s term loan agreement, a payment default on, or a non-payment default, event or condition that permits acceleration of, any indebtedness for borrowed money and certain other specified types of obligations (including guarantees) exceeding $125 million by the borrower or any of their respective significant subsidiaries will cause a default under such borrower’s respective credit facility or term loan agreement. Under SIGECO’s revolving credit facility, a payment default on, or a non-payment default, event or condition that permits acceleration of, any indebtedness for borrowed money and certain other specific types of obligations (including guarantees) exceeding $75 million by SIGECO or any of its significant subsidiaries will cause a default under SIGECO’s credit facility. A default by CenterPoint Energy would not trigger a default under its subsidiaries’ debt instruments or revolving credit facilities.
From time to time, the Registrants consider the acquisition or the disposition of assets or businesses or possible joint ventures, strategic initiatives or other joint ownership arrangements with respect to assets or businesses. Any determination to take action in this regard will be based on market conditions and opportunities existing at the time, and accordingly, the timing, size or success of any efforts and the associated potential capital commitments are unpredictable. The Registrants may seek to fund all or part of any such efforts with proceeds from debt and/or equity issuances. Debt or equity financing may not, however, be available to the Registrants at that time due to a variety of events, including, among others, maintenance of our credit ratings, industry conditions, general economic conditions, market conditions and market perceptions. As announced in September 2021 and updated in November 2022, CenterPoint Energy has increased its planned capital expenditures in its Electric and Natural Gas businesses to support rate base growth and may explore asset sales as a means to efficiently finance a portion of such increased capital expenditures. For further information, see Note 3 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
From time to time, the Registrants may enter into interest rate agreements to hedge, in part, volatility in the U.S. treasury rates by reducing variability in cash flows related to interest payments. For further information, see Note 7(a) to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
Houston Electric’s receivables from the distribution of electricity are collected from REPs that supply the electricity Houston Electric distributes to their customers. Before conducting business, a REP must register with the PUCT and must meet certain financial qualifications. Nevertheless, adverse economic conditions, the February 2021 Winter Storm Event, structural problems in the market served by ERCOT or financial difficulties of one or more REPs could impair the ability of these REPs to pay for Houston Electric’s services or could cause them to delay such payments. Houston Electric depends on these REPs to remit payments on a timely basis, and any delay or default in payment by REPs could adversely affect Houston Electric’s cash flows. In the event of a REP default, Houston Electric’s tariff provides a number of remedies, including the option for Houston Electric to request that the PUCT suspend or revoke the certification of the REP. Applicable regulatory provisions require that customers be shifted to another REP or a provider of last resort if a REP cannot make timely payments. However, Houston Electric remains at risk for payments related to services provided prior to the shift to the replacement REP or the provider of last resort. If a REP were unable to meet its obligations, it could consider, among various options, restructuring under the bankruptcy laws, in which event such REP might seek to avoid honoring its obligations and claims might be made against Houston Electric involving payments it had received from such REP. If a REP were to file for bankruptcy, Houston Electric may not be successful in recovering accrued receivables owed by such REP that are unpaid as of the date the REP filed for bankruptcy. However, PUCT regulations authorize utilities, such as Houston Electric, to defer bad debts resulting from defaults by REPs for recovery in future rate cases, subject to a review of reasonableness and necessity.
In addition to the above factors, the Registrants’ liquidity and capital resources could also be negatively affected by:•cash collateral requirements that could exist in connection with certain contracts, including weather hedging arrangements, and natural gas purchases, natural gas price and natural gas storage activities of CenterPoint Energy’s and CERC’s Natural Gas reportable segment; •acceleration of payment dates on certain gas supply contracts, under certain circumstances, as a result of increased natural gas prices, and concentration of natural gas suppliers (CenterPoint Energy and CERC); •increased costs related to the acquisition of natural gas (CenterPoint Energy and CERC); •increases in interest expense in connection with debt refinancings and borrowings under credit facilities or term loans or the use of alternative sources of financings on capital and other financial markets; •various legislative or regulatory actions; •incremental collateral, if any, that may be required due to regulation of derivatives (CenterPoint Energy); •the ability of REPs, including REP affiliates of NRG and Vistra Energy Corp., to satisfy their obligations to CenterPoint Energy and Houston Electric; •slower customer payments and increased write-offs of receivables due to higher natural gas prices, changing economic conditions, public health threats or severe weather events (CenterPoint Energy and CERC); •the satisfaction of any obligations pursuant to guarantees;•the outcome of litigation, including litigation related to the February 2021 Winter Storm Event;•contributions to pension and postretirement benefit plans; •disruptions in the banking industry, including bank failures and uncertainty regarding bank stability;•restoration costs and revenue losses resulting from future natural disasters such as hurricanes and the timing of recovery of such restoration costs; and•various other risks identified in “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K.
Certain provisions in certain note purchase agreements relating to debt issued by CERC have the effect of restricting the amount of secured debt issued by CERC and debt issued by subsidiaries of CERC Corp. Additionally, Houston Electric and SIGECO are limited in the amount of mortgage bonds they can issue by the General Mortgage and SIGECO’s mortgage indenture, respectively.  For information about the total debt to capitalization financial covenants in the Registrants’ and SIGECO’s revolving credit facilities, see Note 11 to the Interim Condensed Financial Statements.
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the presentation of the Registrants’ financial condition and results of operations and requires management to make difficult, subjective or complex accounting estimates. An accounting estimate is an approximation made by management of a financial statement element, item or account in the financial statements. Accounting estimates in the Registrants’ historical consolidated financial statements measure the effects of past business transactions or events, or the present status of an asset or liability. Additionally, different estimates that the Registrants could have used or changes in an accounting estimate that are reasonably likely to occur could have a material impact on the presentation of their financial condition, results of operations or cash flows. The circumstances that make these judgments difficult, subjective and/or complex have to do with the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be predicted with certainty. The Registrants base their estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that they believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments. These estimates may change as new events occur, as more experience is acquired, as additional information is obtained and as the Registrants’ operating environment changes.
The Registrants review the carrying value of long-lived assets, including identifiable intangibles and goodwill, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that such carrying values may not be recoverable, and at least annually, goodwill is tested for impairment as required by accounting guidance for goodwill and other intangible assets. Unforeseen events, changes in market conditions, and probable regulatory disallowances, where applicable, could have a material effect on the value of long-lived assets, including intangibles and goodwill, future cash flows, interest rate, and regulatory matters, and could result in an impairment charge. CenterPoint Energy and CERC completed their 2022 annual goodwill impairment test during the third quarter of 2022 and determined, based on an income approach or a weighted combination of income and market approaches, that no goodwill impairment charge was required for any reporting unit. The fair values of each reporting unit significantly exceeded thecarrying value of the reporting unit as of the last annual test.  From time to time, the Registrants consider the acquisition or the disposition of assets or businesses, and market information obtained through these exploratory activities is considered during the preparation of the financial statements to determine if an interim impairment test is required. The Registrants did not identify triggering events in connection with their preparation of the financial statements for the three months ended March 31, 2023, and goodwill impairment of long-lived asset impairments tests were not required or performed.
Accounting guidance for rate regulated long-lived asset abandonment requires that the carrying value of an operating asset or an asset under construction is removed from property, plant and equipment when it becomes probable that the asset will be abandoned. The Registrants recognize either a loss on abandonment or regulatory asset when concluded it is probable the cost will be recovered in future rates. The portion of property, plant and equipment that will remain used and useful until abandonment and recovered through depreciation expense in rates will continue to be classified as property, plant and equipment until the asset is abandoned. The Registrants evaluate if an adjustment to the estimated life of the asset and, accordingly, the rate of depreciation, is required to recover the asset while it is still providing service. Determining probability of abandonment or probability of recovery requires significant judgment on the part of management and includes, but is not limited to, consideration of testimony presented in regulatory hearings, proposed regulatory decisions, final regulatory orders and the strength or status of applications for rehearing or state court appeals. If events were to occur that would make the recovery of a regulatory asset no longer probable, the Registrants would be required to write off or write down the regulatory asset. For example, during 2022, the MPUC disallowed recovery of approximately $36 million of jurisdictional gas costs incurred during the February 2021 Winter Storm Event and CenterPoint Energy and CERC’s regulatory asset balance was reduced when such amounts were no longer probable of recovery. For further detail on the regulatory matter, see Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements.Other than the interim goodwill impairment review and securitization transaction discussed above, there have been no significant changes in our critical accounting policies during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the critical accounting policies disclosed in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in the Registrants’ combined 2022 Form 10-K.