
Note numbers refer to “Notes to Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements” in Item 1. Unaudited Financial Statements.
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These include statements relating to plans, prospects, goals, strategies, future actions, events or performance and other statements which are other than statements of historical fact, including: statements regarding the expected impacts of global macroeconomic, health and political conditions; and statements regarding acquisitions (including acquired companies' financial positions, our market position based on acquisitions, product development and business strategies, anticipated cost synergies, expected timing and benefits of pending transactions, and integration of acquired entities or operations, as well as estimates of our and the acquired entities' future expenses, sales and earnings per share) that are forward-looking. In addition, all statements regarding anticipated growth in our revenues, anticipated market conditions, planned product launches, restructuring or business transition expectations, regulatory plans, and expected results of operations are forward-looking. To identify these statements, look for words like “believes,” “outlook,” “probable,” “expects,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “seeks,” “intends,” “plans,” “estimates” or “anticipates” and similar words or phrases. Forward-looking statements necessarily depend on assumptions, data or methods that may be incorrect or imprecise and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Among the factors that could cause our actual results and future actions to differ materially from those described in forward-looking statements are:•Adverse changes in the global or regional general business, political and economic conditions, including the impact of continuing uncertainty and instability of certain countries, man-made or natural disasters and pandemic conditions, that could adversely affect our global markets, and the potential adverse economic impact and related uncertainty caused by these items.•The impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the global response to this invasion on the global economy, European economy, financial markets, energy markets, currency rates and our ability to supply product to, or through, affected countries.•Foreign currency exchange rate and interest rate fluctuations including the risk of fluctuations in the value of foreign currencies or interest rates that would decrease our net sales and earnings.•Our existing and future variable rate indebtedness and associated interest expense is impacted by rate increases, which could adversely affect our financial health or limit our ability to borrow additional funds.•Changes in tax laws, examinations by tax authorities, and changes in our geographic composition of income. •Acquisition-related adverse effects including the failure to successfully achieve the anticipated net sales, margins and earnings benefits of acquisitions, integration delays or costs and the requirement to record significant adjustments to the preliminary fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed within the measurement period, required regulatory approvals for an acquisition not being obtained or being delayed or subject to conditions that are not anticipated, adverse impacts of changes to accounting controls and reporting procedures, contingent liabilities or indemnification obligations, increased leverage and lack of access to available financing (including financing for the acquisition or refinancing of debt owed by us on a timely basis and on reasonable terms).•Compliance costs and potential liability in connection with U.S. and foreign laws and health care regulations pertaining to privacy and security of personal information, such as HIPAA and the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) in the U.S. and the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) requirements in Europe, including but not limited to those resulting from data security breaches.•A major disruption in the operations of our manufacturing, accounting and financial reporting, research and development, distribution facilities or raw material supply chain due to challenges associated with integration of acquisitions, man-made or natural disasters, pandemic conditions, cybersecurity incidents or other causes.•A major disruption in the operations of our manufacturing, accounting and financial reporting, research and development or distribution facilities due to technological problems, including any related to our information systems maintenance, enhancements or new system deployments, integrations or upgrades.•Market consolidation of large customers globally through mergers or acquisitions resulting in a larger proportion or concentration of our business being derived from fewer customers.•Disruptions in supplies of raw materials, particularly components used to manufacture our silicone hydrogel lenses.•New U.S. and foreign government laws and regulations, and changes in existing laws, regulations and enforcement guidance, which affect areas of our operations including, but not limited to, those affecting the health care industry, including the contact lens industry specifically and the medical device or pharmaceutical industries generally, including but not limited to the EU Medical Devices Regulation (MDR) and the EU In Vitro Diagnostic Medical Devices Regulation (IVDR).
•Legal costs, insurance expenses, settlement costs and the risk of an adverse decision, prohibitive injunction or settlement related to product liability, patent infringement, contractual disputes, or other litigation.•Limitations on sales following product introductions due to poor market acceptance.•New competitors, product innovations or technologies, including but not limited to, technological advances by competitors, new products and patents attained by competitors, and competitors' expansion through acquisitions.•Reduced sales, loss of customers and costs and expenses related to product recalls and warning letters.•Failure to receive, or delays in receiving, regulatory approvals or certifications for products.•Failure of our customers and end users to obtain adequate coverage and reimbursement from third-party payers for our products and services.•The requirement to provide for a significant liability or to write off, or accelerate depreciation on, a significant asset, including goodwill, other intangible assets and idle manufacturing facilities and equipment.•The success of our research and development activities and other start-up projects.•Dilution to earnings per share from acquisitions or issuing stock.•Impact and costs incurred from changes in accounting standards and policies.•Risks related to environmental, social and corporate governance (ESG) issues, including those related to climate change and sustainability.•Other events described in our Securities and Exchange Commission filings, including the “Business” and “Risk Factors” sections in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2022, as such Risk Factors may be updated in quarterly filings including updates made in this filing.We caution investors that forward-looking statements reflect our analysis only on their stated date. We disclaim any intent to update them except as required by law.
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the first quarter of fiscal 2023 ended January 31, 2023, and compare them with the same period of fiscal 2022. We also discuss our cash flows and current financial condition under “Capital Resources and Liquidity.” Within the tables presented, percentages are calculated based on the underlying whole-dollar amounts and, therefore, may not recalculate exactly from the rounded numbers used for disclosure purposes.
We are optimistic about the long-term prospects for the worldwide contact lens and general health care markets, and the resilience of and growth prospects for our businesses and products. However, we face significant risks and uncertainties in our global operating environment. These risks include uncertain global and regional business, political and economic conditions, including but not limited to those associated with man-made or natural disasters, pandemic conditions, inflation, foreign exchange rate fluctuations, regulatory developments, supply chain disruptions, and escalating global trade barriers. For more information on the risks associated with our global operating environment, refer to Part II, Item 1A "Risk Factors" herein. These risks and uncertainties have adversely affected our sales, cash flow and performance in the past and are likely to further adversely affect our future sales, cash flow and performance.Global Market and Economic Conditions - Over the last few years in the U.S. and globally, market and economic conditions have been challenging, particularly in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Foreign countries, in particular the Euro zone, have experienced recessionary pressures and face continued concerns about the systemic impacts of adverse economic conditions and geopolitical issues. In addition, changes in economic conditions, supply chain constraints, logistics challenges, labor shortages, the war in Ukraine, and steps taken by governments and central banks, particularly in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as other stimulus and spending programs, have led to higher inflation, which is likely to lead to an increase in costs and may cause changes in fiscal and monetary policy, including increased interest rates. In a higher inflationary environment, we may be unable to raise the prices of our products and services sufficiently to keep up with the increase in our costs. These market and economic conditions could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations and financial condition.CooperVision - We compete in the worldwide contact lens market with our spherical, toric, multifocal, toric multifocal contact lenses offered in a variety of materials including using silicone hydrogel Aquaform® technology and PC Technology™. We believe that there will be lower contact lens wearer dropout rates as technology improves and enhances the wearing experience through a combination of improved designs and materials and the growth of preferred modalities such as single-use and monthly wearing options. CooperVision also competes in the myopia management and specialty eye care contact lens markets with myopia management contact lenses using its ActivControl® technology and with products such as orthokeratology (ortho-k) and scleral lenses. In November 2019, CooperVision received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval for its MiSight® 1 day lens, which is the first and only FDA-approved product indicated to slow the progression of myopia in children with treatment initiated between the ages of 8-12 and became available in the United States during fiscal 2020. In August 2021, CooperVision received Chinese National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) approval for its MiSight® 1 day lens for use in China. CooperVision is focused on greater worldwide market penetration using recently introduced products, and we continue to expand our presence in existing and emerging markets, including through acquisitions. Our ability to compete successfully with a full range of silicone hydrogel products is an important factor to achieving our desired future levels of sales growth and profitability. CooperVision manufactures and markets a wide variety of silicone hydrogel contact lenses. Our single-use silicone hydrogel product franchises, clariti® and MyDay®, remain a focus as we expect increasing demand for these products, as well as future single-use products, as the global contact lens market continues to shift to this modality. Outside of single-use, the Biofinity® and Avaira Vitality® product families comprise our focus in the FRP, or frequent replacement product, market which encompasses the monthly and 2-week modalities. Included in this segment are unique products such as Biofinity Energys®, which helps individuals with digital eye fatigue.CooperSurgical - Our CooperSurgical business competes in the general health care market with a commitment to advancing the health of women, babies and families through its diversified portfolio of products and services, including medical devices, fertility, genomics, diagnostics, cryostorage, contraception and healthcare technology services (such as cord blood and cord tissue storage and genomic testing). CooperSurgical has established its market presence and distribution system by developing products and acquiring companies, products and services that complement its business model. On December 17, 2021, CooperSurgical completed the acquisition of 100% of the equity interests in Generate Life Sciences (Generate), a privately held leading provider of donor egg and sperm for fertility treatments, fertility cryopreservation services and newborn stem cell storage (cord blood & cord tissue), and paid an aggregate purchase consideration of approximately $1.663 billion.
Competitive factors in the segments in which CooperSurgical competes include technological and scientific advances, product quality and availability, price and customer service (including response time and effective communication of product information to physicians, consumers, fertility clinics and hospitals).
The contact lens market has two major product categories:•Spherical lenses including lenses that correct near- and farsightedness uncomplicated by more complex visual defects; and•Toric and multifocal lenses including lenses that, in addition to correcting near- and farsightedness, address more complex visual defects such as astigmatism and presbyopia by adding optical properties of cylinder and axis, which correct for irregularities in the shape of the cornea.
Single-use spheres – This includes Biomedics 1 day, clariti 1 day, MyDay, MiSight and Proclear 1 dayToric – This includes Avaira Vitality toric, Biomedics toric, Biofinity toric, clariti 1 day toric, MyDay toric and Proclear toricMultifocal – This includes Biofinity multifocal, Biofinity toric multifocal, clariti 1 day multifocal, MyDay multifocal and Proclear 1 day multifocalNon single-use sphere, other – This includes our Avaira Vitality spheres, frequent replacement product (FRP) lens portfolio (Biofinity spheres, Biofinity Energys, Biomedics, Proclear spheres, clariti spheres), ortho-k, scleral and custom lenses, contact lens solutions and other
In the three months ended January 31, 2023, the growth experienced across all categories was partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange rate fluctuations, which approximated $43.4 million. •Toric and multifocal lenses grew primarily through the success of MyDay and Biofinity.•Single-use sphere lenses grew primarily through MyDay, clariti and MiSight lenses.•Non single-use sphere lenses grew primarily through Biofinity and ortho-k.•"Other" products primarily include lens care which represented approximately 1% of net sales in the three months ended January 31, 2023 and 2022.•Total silicone hydrogel products increased by 4% in the three months ended January 31, 2023, representing 79% of net sales, compared to 78% in the three months ended January 31, 2022.
CooperVision competes in the worldwide soft contact lens market and services in three primary regions: the Americas, EMEA (Europe, Middle East and Africa) and Asia Pacific.
CooperVision's growth in net sales was primarily attributable to market gains of silicone hydrogel contact lenses. Refer to CooperVision Net Sales by Category above for further discussion.
CooperSurgical supplies the family health care market with a diversified portfolio of products and services. Our office and surgical offerings include products that facilitate surgical and non-surgical procedures that are commonly performed primarily by obstetricians and gynecologists in hospitals, surgical centers, fertility clinics and medical offices. Fertility offerings include highly specialized products and services that target the IVF process, including diagnostics testing with a goal to make fertility treatment safer, more efficient and convenient.The chart below shows the percentage of net sales of office and surgical and fertility.
Office/Surgical – This includes Endosee endometrial imaging products, Fetal Pillow cephalic elevation devices for use in Cesarean sections, illuminated speculum products, Lone Star retractor systems, loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP) products, Mara water ablation systems, newborn stem cell storage, PARAGARD contraceptive IUDs, point-of-care products and uterine positioning products.Fertility – Our significant fertility products and services include cryostorage, donor gamete services, fertility consumables and equipment and genomic services (including preimplantation genetic testing).
In the three months ended January 31, 2023, the net sales increase in both categories was primarily due to the addition of Generate. The increase was slightly offset by unfavorable foreign exchange rate fluctuations, which approximated $7.8 million.
Consolidated gross margin decreased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 to 65% compared to 66% in the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily driven by unfavorable currency.
CooperVision's SGA decreased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to the $31.8 million release of contingent consideration liability associated with SightGlass Vision's regulatory approval milestone. CooperSurgical's SGA increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to the addition of Generate's SGA and acquisition and integration expenses.
Corporate SGA increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to share-based compensation related expenses.
CooperVision's R&D expense for the three months ended January 31, 2023 remained relatively flat year over year. CooperVision's R&D activities are primarily focused on the development of contact lenses, manufacturing technology and process enhancements.CooperSurgical's R&D expense increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, mainly due to European Medical Device Regulation costs. CooperSurgical's R&D activities are focused on developing and refining diagnostic and therapeutic products including medical interventions, surgical devices and fertility solutions.
CooperVision's amortization expense for the three months ended January 31, 2023 remained relatively flat year over year. CooperSurgical's amortization expense increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to the amortization of intangible assets newly acquired through acquisitions.
CooperVision's operating income increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to an increase in net sales partially offset by net changes in operating expenses. CooperSurgical's operating income decreased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to an increase in SGA and amortization expenses, partially offset by an increase in net sales.Corporate operating loss increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to higher share-based compensation expense.On a consolidated basis, operating income increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due an increase in consolidated net sales.
Interest expense increased during the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to higher average debt balances and higher interest rates.
Foreign exchange gain is primarily associated with the relative weakening of the US dollar against foreign currencies and the effect on intercompany receivables during the three months ended January 31, 2023.Other expense (income), net increased in the three months ended January 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended January 31, 2022, primarily due to loss on minority investments, partially offset by defined benefit plan related income.
The effective tax rates for the three months ended January 31, 2023 and January 31, 2022 were 30.7% and 21.8%, respectively. The increase was primarily due to changes in the geographic composition of pre-tax earnings, an increase in the UK statutory tax rate from 19% to 25%, and capitalization of research and experimental expenditures for fiscal 2023 as required by the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
Working capital on January 31, 2023 and October 31, 2022, was $661.7 million and $253.4 million, respectively. The increase in working capital was primarily due to repayment of the 364-day term loan during the first three months of fiscal 2023. See Note 5. Financing Arrangements for further information.
Cash provided by operating activities in the first three months of fiscal 2023 remains flat compared to the first three months of fiscal 2022, primarily due to net changes in other non-cash items, partially offset by the net cash flow from changes in operating capital and the $31.8 million release of contingent consideration liability associated with SGV's regulatory approval milestone.
Cash used in investing activities in the first three months of fiscal 2023 was lower than cash used in the first three months of fiscal 2022, primarily attributable to $1.6 billion cash paid, net of cash acquired, for the Generate acquisition in the first three months of fiscal 2022. Refer to Note 2. Acquisitions and Joint Venture for further information.
Cash used in financing activities in the first three months of fiscal 2023 was primarily due to repayments of $338.0 million on the 2021 364-day term loan, partially offset by $276.5 million of funds drawn on the 2020 revolving credit.Cash provided by financing activities in the first three months of fiscal 2022 was primarily due to funds received from the 2021 term loan facility ($1.5 billion) and the 2021 364-day term loan facility ($840.0 million), partially offset by $546.1 million repayments of the 2021 revolving credit and $78.5 million repurchases of common stock. Refer to Note 5. Financing Arrangements for further information.The following is a summary of the maximum commitments and the net amounts available to us under different credit facilities as of January 31, 2023:
As of January 31, 2023, the Company was in compliance with all debt covenants. See Note 5. Financing Arrangements of the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements for additional information.
Considering recent market conditions and the COVID-19 pandemic crisis, we have re-evaluated our operating cash flows and cash requirements and continue to believe that current cash, cash equivalents, future cash flow from operating activities and cash available under our 2020 Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs, including working capital needs, capital expenditures and contractual obligations for at least 12 months from the issuance date of the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements included in this quarterly report. To the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our liquidity needs such as that for acquisitions, share repurchases, cash dividends or other activities as we execute our business strategy, we anticipate that additional funds will be obtained through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of these potential sources of funds; however, such financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all.
In December 2011, our Board of Directors authorized the 2012 Share Repurchase Program and through subsequent amendments, the most recent in March 2017, the total repurchase authorization was increased from $500.0 million to $1.0 billion of the Company's common stock. The program has no expiration date and may be discontinued at any time. Purchases under the 2012 Share Repurchase Program are subject to a review of the circumstances in place at the time and may be made from time to time as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements. As of January 31, 2023, $256.4 million remains authorized for repurchase under the 2012 Share Repurchase Program.During the three months ended January 31, 2023, there was no share repurchase under the 2012 Share Repurchase Program.
We paid a semiannual dividend of approximately $1.5 million or 3 cents per share, on February 9, 2023, to stockholders of record on January 20, 2023.
The UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), announced in July 2017 that it will no longer persuade or require banks to submit rates for LIBOR after 2021. In March 2021, the FCA confirmed its intention to stop requiring banks to submit rates required to calculate LIBOR after 2021. However, for U.S. dollar-denominated (USD) LIBOR, only one-week and two-month USD LIBOR will cease to be published after 2021, and all remaining USD LIBOR tenors will continue being published until June 2023. Further, in March 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting. This guidance provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying GAAP to contracts, hedging relationships, and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met. Effective February 1, 2023, the Company transitioned its credit agreements from LIBOR to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR"). While the notional value of agreements potentially indexed to LIBOR is material, we do not expect a material impact on our financial statements related to this transition.
Information regarding estimates and critical accounting policies is included in Management's Discussion and Analysis on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2022. There have been no material changes in our policies from those previously discussed in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 31, 2022.
Information regarding new accounting pronouncements is included in Note 1. General of the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
ActivControl®, Aquaform®, Avaira Vitality®, Biofinity®, Biofinity Energys®, Biomedics®, Proclear®, MyDay® and MiSight® are registered trademarks of The Cooper Companies, Inc., its affiliates and/or subsidiaries. PC Technology™ is a trademark of The Cooper Companies, Inc., its affiliates and/or subsidiaries. The clariti® mark is a registered trademark of The Cooper Companies, Inc., its affiliates and/or subsidiaries worldwide except in the United States where the use of clariti® is licensed. Endosee®, Insorb®, Paragard®, Mara®, Fetal Pillow® and Generate Life Sciences® are registered trademarks of CooperSurgical, Inc, its affiliates and/or subsidiaries.