
We are one of the largest global pharmaceutical sourcing and distribution services companies, helping both healthcare providers and pharmaceutical and biotech manufacturers improve patient access to products and enhance patient care. We deliver innovative programs and services designed to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of the pharmaceutical supply chain in both human and animal health.We are organized geographically based upon the products and services we provide to our customers, and we report our results under two reportable segments: U.S. Healthcare Solutions and International Healthcare Solutions.
The U.S. Healthcare Solutions reportable segment distributes a comprehensive offering of brand-name, specialty brand-name and generic pharmaceuticals, over-the-counter healthcare products, home healthcare supplies and equipment, and related services to a wide variety of healthcare providers, including acute care hospitals and health systems, independent and chain retail pharmacies, mail order pharmacies, medical clinics, long-term care and alternate site pharmacies, and other customers. The U.S. Healthcare Solutions reportable segment also provides pharmaceutical distribution (including plasma and other blood products, injectable pharmaceuticals, vaccines, and other specialty pharmaceutical products) and additional services to physicians who specialize in a variety of disease states, especially oncology, and to other healthcare providers, including hospitals and dialysis clinics. Additionally, the U.S. Healthcare Solutions reportable segment provides data analytics, outcomes research, and additional services for biotechnology and pharmaceutical manufacturers. The U.S. Healthcare Solutions reportable segment also provides pharmacy management, staffing and additional consulting services, and supply management software to a variety of retail and institutional healthcare providers. It also provides a full suite of integrated manufacturer services that ranges from clinical trial support to product post-approval and commercialization support. Additionally, it delivers packaging solutions to institutional and retail healthcare providers. Through its animal health business, the U.S. Healthcare Solutions reportable segment sells pharmaceuticals, vaccines, parasiticides, diagnostics, micro feed ingredients, and various other products to customers in both the companion animal and production animal markets. It also offers demand-creating sales force services to manufacturers.
The International Healthcare Solutions reportable segment consists of businesses that focus on international pharmaceutical wholesale and related service operations and global commercialization services. The International Healthcare Solutions reportable segment distributes pharmaceuticals, other healthcare products, and related services to healthcare providers, including pharmacies, doctors, health centers and hospitals primarily in Europe. It is a leading global specialty transportation and logistics provider for the biopharmaceutical industry. It is also a leading provider of specialized services, including regulatory affairs, development consulting and scientific affairs, pharmacovigilance, and quality management and compliance, for the life sciences industry. In Canada, the business drives innovative partnerships with manufacturers, providers, and pharmacies to improve product access and efficiency throughout the healthcare supply chain.
We acquired and assumed control of PharmaLex Holding Gmbh ("PharmaLex") effective January 1, 2023 for $1.473 billion, subject to customary adjustments, including a $29.3 million cash holdback. PharmaLex is a leading provider of specialized services for the life sciences industry. PharmaLex's services include regulatory affairs, development consulting and scientific affairs, pharmacovigilance, and quality management and compliance. PharmaLex is headquartered in Germany and operates in over 30 countries. The acquisition advances our role as a partner of choice for biopharmaceutical partners across the pharmaceutical development and commercialization journey. PharmaLex is a component of our International Healthcare Solutions reportable segment.
On January 24, 2023, we announced our intent to change our name to better reflect our bold vision and purpose-driven approach to creating healthier futures. We intend to begin operating as Cencora in the second half of calendar year 2023. The new name represents a unified presence that will continue to fuel our ongoing growth strategy and advance our impact across healthcare.
On April 20, 2023, we and TPG, a global alternative asset management firm, announced an agreement to acquire OneOncology, a network of leading oncology practices. We will invest approximately $685 million (representing approximately 35%) in a joint venture formed to acquire OneOncology for approximately $2.1 billion, and TPG will acquire the majority interest in the joint venture.The transaction is expected to close by the end of September 2023 and is subject to the satisfaction of customary closing conditions, including receipt of required regulatory approvals.
This executive summary provides highlights from the results of operations that follow: •Revenue increased by $5.7 billion, or 9.9%, from the prior year quarter and $9.0 billion, or 7.6%, from the prior year six-month period due to growth in our U.S. Healthcare Solutions segment. The U.S. Healthcare Solutions segment grew its revenue by $5.8 billion, or 11.3%, from the prior quarter and $9.0 billion, or 8.7%, from the prior year six-month period due to overall market growth primarily driven by unit volume growth, including increased sales to our two largest customers and increased sales of specialty products to physician practices and health systems, offset in part by a decrease in sales of COVID-19 treatments (primarily commercial treatments). Revenue in International Healthcare Solutions decreased $12.8 million, from the prior year quarter and $51.3 million from the prior year six-month period. The decrease from the prior year quarter and six-month period was primarily due to the June 2022 divestiture of our Brazil specialty business and a decrease in sales at Alliance Healthcare, our European distribution business, resulting from unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods, offset in part by incremental revenue resulting from our January 2023 acquisition of PharmaLex and increased revenue from our less-than-wholly-owned Brazil full-line distribution business;•Gross profit increased by $60.4 million, or 2.7%, from the prior year quarter and $146.0 million, or 3.4% from the prior year six-month period. Gross profit in the current year quarter and six-month period was favorably impacted by an increase in gross profit in both reportable segments. The six-month period was also favorably impacted by an increase in gains from antitrust litigation settlements. The increases were offset in part by last-in, first-out ("LIFO") expense in the current year periods in comparison to a LIFO credit in the prior year periods. U.S. Healthcare Solutions gross profit increased by $89.3 million, or 6.1%, from the prior year quarter and $196.9 million, or 7.2%, from the prior year six-month period due to increased sales. Gross profit in International Healthcare Solutions increased by $48.1 million, or 6.4%, from the prior year quarter and $49.5 million, or 3.3%, from the prior year six-month period primarily due to the January 2023 acquisition of PharmaLex, increases in our global specialty logistics business, and our less-than-wholly-owned Brazil full-line distribution business, offset in part by the June 2022 divestiture of our Brazil specialty business and a decrease in our European distribution business resulting from unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods;•Total operating expenses increased by $280.0 million, or 19.2%, compared to the prior year quarter and $376.9 million, or 13.1%, from the prior year six-month period primarily as a result of an increase in distribution, selling, and administrative expenses, restructuring and other expenses, and amortization expense;•Total segment operating income increased by $15.5 million, or 1.7%, from the prior year quarter was flat from the prior year six-month period as increases in operating income in the U.S. Healthcare Solutions segment were offset in part by decreases in operating income in the International Healthcare Solutions segment resulting from unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods;•Our effective tax rates were 16.4% and 18.2% for the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Our effective tax rates were 23.7% and 24.1% for the three and six months ended March 31, 2022, respectively. The effective tax rate for the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 was lower than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the benefit of non-U.S. income taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory rate, benefits from tax authority audit resolutions, and tax benefits associated with the vesting of restricted stock units and stock option exercises, offset in part by U.S. state income taxes.
Our future revenue growth will continue to be affected by various factors, such as industry growth trends, including drug utilization, the introduction of new, innovative brand therapies, the likely increase in the number of generic drugs and biosimilars that will be available over the next few years as a result of the expiration of certain drug patents held by brand-name pharmaceutical manufacturers and the rate of conversion from brand products to those generic drugs and biosimilars, price inflation and price deflation, general economic conditions in the United States and Europe, currency exchange rates, competition within the industry, customer consolidation, changes in pharmaceutical manufacturer pricing and distribution policies and practices, increased downward pressure on government and other third-party reimbursement rates to our customers, changes in government rules and regulations, and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.Revenue increased by 9.9% and 7.6% from the prior year quarter and six-month period, respectively, due to growth in the U.S. Healthcare Solutions segment.The U.S. Healthcare Solutions segment grew its revenue by $5.8 billion, or 11.3%, from the prior year quarter and $9.0 billion, or 8.7%, from the prior year six-month period due to overall market growth primarily driven by unit volume growth, including increased sales to our two largest customers and increased sales of specialty products to physician practices and health systems, offset in part by a decrease in sales of COVID-19 treatments (primarily commercial treatments). Sales to our two largest customers increased by $1.9 billion and $2.9 billion in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 in comparison to the same prior year periods. COVID-19 treatment revenue declined by $0.4 billion and $0.7 billion in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 in comparison to the same prior year periods.International Healthcare Solutions' revenue decreased by $12.8 million, or 0.2%, from the prior year quarter and $51.3 million, or 0.4%, from the prior year six-month period. The decreases from the prior year quarter and six-month period were primarily due to the June 2022 divestiture of our Brazil specialty business and a decrease in sales at Alliance Healthcare, our European distribution business, resulting from unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods, offset in part by incremental revenue from our January 2023 acquisition of PharmaLex and increased revenue from our less-than-wholly-owned Brazil full-line distribution business.A number of our contracts with customers, including group purchasing organizations, are typically subject to expiration each year. We may lose a significant customer if an existing contract with such customer expires without being extended, renewed, or replaced. During the six months ended March 31, 2023, no significant contracts expired. Over the next twelve months, there are no significant contracts scheduled to expire. Additionally, from time to time, significant contracts may be terminated in accordance with their terms or extended, renewed, or replaced prior to their expiration dates. If those contracts are extended, renewed, or replaced at less favorable terms, they may also negatively impact our revenue, results of operations, and cash flows.
Gross profit increased by $60.4 million, or 2.7%, from the prior year quarter and $146.0 million, or 3.4%, from the prior year six-month period. Gross profit in the current year quarter and six-month month period was favorably impacted by increases in gross profit in both reportable segments. The current year six-month period was also favorably impacted by an increase in gains from antitrust litigation settlements. The increases were offset in part by LIFO expense in the current year periods in comparison to a LIFO credit in the prior year periods.U.S. Healthcare Solutions gross profit increased by $89.3 million, or 6.1%, from the prior year quarter and $196.9 million, or 7.2%, from the prior year six-month period primarily due to increased sales. As a percentage of revenue, U.S. Healthcare Solutions' gross profit margin was 2.74% and 2.60% in the current year quarter and six-month period, respectively, a 13-basis point decrease from prior year quarter and a 4-basis point decrease from the prior year six-month period primarily due to increased sales to our larger customers, which have lower gross profit margins, and lower sales of COVID-19 treatments.Gross profit in International Healthcare Solutions increased by $48.1 million, or 6.4%, from the prior year quarter and $49.5 million, or 3.3%, from the prior year six-month period primarily due to the January 2023 acquisition of PharmaLex, increases in our global specialty logistics business and our less-than-wholly-owned Brazil full-line distribution business, offset in part by the June 2022 divestiture of our Brazil specialty business and a decrease in our European distribution business resulting from unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods.We recognized gains from antitrust litigation settlements with pharmaceutical manufacturers of $49.9 million in the six months ended March 31, 2023. We recognized gains from antitrust litigation settlements with pharmaceutical manufacturers of $1.8 million in three and six months ended March 31, 2022. The gains were recorded as reductions to Cost of Goods Sold (see Note 11 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements).Our cost of goods sold for interim periods includes a LIFO provision that is recorded ratably on a quarterly basis and is based on our estimated annual LIFO provision. The annual LIFO provision, which we estimate on a quarterly basis, is affected by manufacturer pricing practices, which may be impacted by market and other external influences, expected changes in inventory quantities, and product mix, many of which are difficult to predict. Changes to any of the above factors may have a material impact on our annual LIFO provision. LIFO expense in the current year periods in comparison to LIFO credits in the prior year periods were primarily driven by lower generic pharmaceutical deflation, higher brand pharmaceutical inflation, and higher brand inventory product mix estimated in the current fiscal year LIFO provision.
Distribution, selling, and administrative expenses increased by $117.8 million, or 9.8%, compared to prior year quarter and $238.7 million, or 10.1%, compared to prior year six-month period primarily to support revenue growth in U.S. Healthcare Solutions and included inflationary impacts on certain operating expenses. As a percentage of revenue, distribution, selling, and administrative expenses were 2.08% and 2.07% in the current year quarter and six-month period, respectively, which was flat compared to the prior year quarter and represented a 5-basis point increase compared to the prior year six-month period.Depreciation expense increased 4.3% and 4.2% from the prior year quarter and six-month period, respectively. Amortization expense increased 78.7% and 34.0% from the prior year quarter and six-month period, respectively, primarily due to accelerated amortization expense recorded in connection with the revised useful lives of certain trade names resulting from our intended company name change.Litigation and opioid-related expenses in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 included legal fees in connection with opioid lawsuits and investigations. Litigation and opioid-related expenses in the three months ended March 31, 2022 included a $29.8 million accrual related to opioid litigation settlements and $22.3 million of legal fees in connection with opioid lawsuits and investigations. Litigation and opioid-related expenses in the six months ended March 31, 2022 included $48.1 million of legal fees in connection with opioid lawsuits and investigations and a $36.6 million accrual related to opioid litigation settlements.Acquisition-related deal and integration expenses in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 primarily related to the acquisition of PharmaLex and the continued integration of Alliance Healthcare. Acquisition-related deal and integration expenses in the three and six months ended March 31, 2022 primarily related to the integration of Alliance Healthcare.Restructuring and other expenses are comprised of the following for the periods indicated:
Restructuring and employee severance costs in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 primarily included expenses incurred in connection with a workforce reduction in our U.S. Healthcare Solutions segment. Business transformation efforts in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 included rebranding costs associated with our name change to Cencora and non-recurring expenses related to significant strategic initiatives to improve operational efficiency. The majority of these costs related to services provided by third-party consultants, including certain technology initiatives. Business transformation efforts in the three and six months ended March 31, 2022 primarily related to costs associated with reorganizing to further align our organization to our customers' needs. The majority of these costs related to services provided by third-party consultants, including certain technology initiatives.In the three months ended March 31, 2023, one of our foreign business units experienced a cybersecurity event that impacted a standalone legacy information technology platform in one country and the foreign business unit's ability to operate in that country for approximately two weeks. In connection with this isolated event, we incurred costs to restore the foreign business unit's operations in that country, which was recorded in Other expenses in the above table. The majority of Other expenses in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 related to the cybersecurity event.
Segment operating income is evaluated before gains from antitrust litigation settlements; LIFO (expense) credit; Turkey highly inflationary impact; acquisition-related intangibles amortization; litigation and opioid-related expenses; acquisition-related deal and integration expenses; restructuring and other expenses; and impairment of assets.U.S. Healthcare Solutions' operating income increased by $26.6 million, or 3.6%, from prior year quarter and $29.9 million, or 2.3%, from prior year six-month period primarily due to the increases in gross profit, as noted above, and was offset in part by the increases in operating expenses. As a percentage of revenue, U.S. Healthcare Solutions' operating income margin was 1.33% and 1.18% in the current year quarter and six-month period ended March 31, 2023, respectively, and represented declines of 10 basis points and 7 basis points compared to the prior year quarter and prior year six-month period, respectively, primarily due to the declines in gross profit margins and an increase in the operating expense margin in the current year six-month period.International Healthcare Solutions' operating income decreased by $11.1 million, or 5.9%, from the prior year quarter and $29.9 million, or 8.1%, from the prior year six-month period primarily due to a decrease in operating income in our European distribution business resulting from unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods.
Interest expense, net and the respective weighted average interest rates for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are as follows:
Interest expense, net and the respective weighted average interest rates for the six months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are as follows:
Interest expense, net increased by $11.2 million, or 21.2%, from prior year quarter and $3.8 million, or 3.6%, from the prior year six-month period primarily due to the increases in interest expense. The increases in interest expense were primarily driven by an increase in borrowings and interest rates associated with our variable-rate debt. The increases in interest expense were offset in part by increases in interest income, which were primarily driven by higher investment interest rates in the current year periods in comparison to the prior year periods. The higher investment interest rates were offset in part by lower average investment cash balances in the current year quarter in comparison to the prior year quarter.
Our effective tax rates were 16.4% and 18.2% for the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Our effective tax rates were 23.7% and 24.1% for the three and six months ended March 31, 2022, respectively. The effective tax rate for the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 was lower than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to the benefit of non-U.S. income taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory rate, benefits from tax authority audit resolutions, and tax benefits associated with the vesting of restricted stock units and stock option exercises, offset in part by U.S. state income taxes. The effective tax rate in the three and six months ended March 31, 2022 were higher than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to U.S. state income taxes as well as discrete tax expense associated with foreign valuation allowance adjustments, offset in part by the benefit of non-U.S. income taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory rate.
Our operating results have generated cash flows, which, together with availability under our debt agreements and credit terms from suppliers, have provided sufficient capital resources to finance working capital and cash operating requirements, and to fund capital expenditures, acquisitions, repayment of debt, the payment of interest on outstanding debt, dividends, and purchases of shares of our common stock.Our primary ongoing cash requirements will be to finance working capital, fund the repayment of debt, fund the payment of interest on debt, fund the payment of dividends, fund purchases of our common stock, finance acquisitions, and fund capital expenditures and routine growth and expansion through new business opportunities. Future cash flows from operations and borrowings are expected to be sufficient to fund our ongoing cash requirements, including the opioid litigation payments that will be made over the next 16 years (see below).
As of March 31, 2023 and September 30, 2022, our cash and cash equivalents held by foreign subsidiaries were $664.6 million and $688.4 million, respectively. We have the ability to repatriate the majority of our cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries without incurring significant additional taxes upon repatriation.We have increased seasonal needs related to our inventory build during the December and March quarters that, depending on our cash balance, may require the use of our credit facilities to fund short-term capital needs. Our cash balances in the six months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were supplemented by intra-period credit facility borrowings to cover short-term working capital needs. The largest amount of intra-period borrowings under our revolving and securitization credit facilities that was outstanding at any one time during the six months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $2,121.0 million and $590.0 million, respectively. We had $35,443.6 million and $3,579.5 million of cumulative intra-period borrowings that were repaid under our credit facilities during the six months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. During the six months ended March 31, 2023, our operating activities provided cash of $1,339.6 million in comparison to $1,130.0 million in the prior year period. Cash provided by operations during the six months ended March 31, 2023 was principally the result of the following:•An increase in accounts payable of $2,391.2 million primarily due to the increase in our inventory balances and the timing of scheduled payments to our suppliers;•Net income of $904.4 million; and•Positive non-cash items of $527.8 million, which is primarily comprised of amortization expense of $218.5 million and depreciation expense of $201.7 million.The cash provided by the above items was offset in part by the following:•An increase in inventories of $1,413.5 million to support the increase in business volume and due to seasonal needs;•A increase in accounts receivable of $861.2 million primarily due to an increase in sales and the timing of scheduled payments from our customers;•A decrease in accrued expenses of $260.3 million primarily due to the payment of accrued liabilities that were on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of September 30, 2022.Cash provided by operations during the six months ended March 31, 2022 was principally the result of the following:•Net income of $1,004.7 million;•An increase in accounts payable of $598.4 million primarily due to the increase in our inventory balances and the timing of scheduled payments to our suppliers; and•Positive non-cash items of $423.4 million, which is primarily comprised of depreciation expense of $194.4 million and amortization expense of $165.6 million.The cash provided by the above items was offset in part by the following:•An increase in accounts receivable of $527.5 million primarily due to an increase in sales and the timing of scheduled payments from our customers;•An increase in inventories of $215.5 million to support the increase in business volume and due to seasonal needs; and•A decrease in accrued expenses of $134.7 million primarily due to the payment of accrual liabilities that were on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of September 30, 2021.We use days sales outstanding, days inventory on hand, and days payable outstanding to evaluate our working capital performance. The below financial metrics are calculated based upon a quarterly average and can be impacted by the timing of cash receipts and disbursements, which can vary significantly depending upon the day of the week on which the month ends.
Our cash flows from operating activities can vary significantly from period to period based upon fluctuations in our period-end working capital account balances. Additionally, any changes to payment terms with a significant customer or manufacturer supplier could have a material impact to our cash flows from operations. Operating cash flows during the six months ended March 31, 2023 included $127.1 million of interest payments and $190.4 million of income tax payments, net of refunds. Operating cash flows during the six months ended March 31, 2022 included $103.3 million of interest payments and $146.7 million of income tax payments, net of refunds.Capital expenditures in the six months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were $178.6 million and $209.3 million, respectively. Significant capital expenditures in the six months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 included investments in various technology initiatives, including technology investments at Alliance Healthcare.We currently expect to invest approximately $500 million for capital expenditures during fiscal 2023. Larger 2023 capital expenditures will include investments relating to various technology initiatives, including technology investments at Alliance Healthcare and those needed to comply with new regulatory requirements.In addition to capital expenditures, net cash used in investing activity in the six months ended March 31, 2023 included $1,406.3 million for the acquisition of PharmaLex (see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). Net cash used in investing activity in the six months ended March 31, 2022 included $124.2 million of costs to acquire companies, including $60.0 million that was paid to settle accrued consideration related to the Alliance Healthcare acquisition. Net cash used in financing activities in the six months ended March 31, 2023 principally resulted from a $675 million repayment of our 0.737% senior notes that matured in March 2023, $807.2 million purchases of our common stock and $201.5 million in cash dividends paid on our common stock. Net cash used in financing activities in the six months ended March 31, 2022 principally resulted from the repayment of our $250 million term loan and $197.9 million in cash dividends paid on our common stock.
The following table illustrates our debt structure as of March 31, 2023, including availability under the multi-currency revolving credit facility, the receivables securitization facility, the revolving credit note, the money market facility, the Alliance Healthcare debt, and the overdraft facility:
In March 2023, the remaining balance of $675 million on our original $1.5 billion, 0.737% senior notes matured and was repaid. We have a $2.4 billion multi-currency senior unsecured revolving credit facility ("Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility") with a syndicate of lenders, which is scheduled to expire in October 2027. Interest on borrowings under the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility accrues at specified rates based on our debt rating and ranges from 80.5 basis points to 122.5 basis points over SOFR/EURIBOR/CDOR/RFR, as applicable (102.5 basis points over SOFR/EURIBOR/CDOR/RFR as of March 31, 2023) and from 0 basis points to 22.5 basis points over the alternate base rate and Canadian prime rate, as applicable. We pay facility fees to maintain the availability under the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility at specified rates based on our debt rating, ranging from 7 basis points to 15.0 basis points, annually, of the total commitment (10 basis points as of March 31, 2023). We may choose to repay or reduce our commitments under the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility at any time. The Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility contains covenants, including compliance with a financial leverage ratio test, as well as others that impose limitations on, among other things, indebtedness of subsidiaries and asset sales, with which we were compliant as of March 31, 2023.We have a commercial paper program whereby we may from time to time issue short-term promissory notes in an aggregate amount of up to $2.4 billion at any one time. Amounts available under the program may be borrowed, repaid, and re-borrowed from time to time. The maturities on the notes will vary, but may not exceed 365 days from the date of issuance. The notes will bear interest, if interest bearing, or will be sold at a discount from their face amounts. The commercial paper program does not increase our borrowing capacity as it is fully backed by our Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility. There were no borrowings outstanding under our commercial paper program as of March 31, 2023.We have a $1,450 million receivables securitization facility ("Receivables Securitization Facility"), which is scheduled to expire in October 2025. We have available to us an accordion feature whereby the commitment on the Receivables Securitization Facility may be increased by up to $250 million, subject to lender approval, for seasonal needs during the December and March quarters. Interest rates are based on prevailing market rates for short-term commercial paper or 30-day Term SOFR plus a program fee. We pay a customary unused fee at prevailing market rates, annually, to maintain the availability under the Receivables Securitization Facility. The Receivables Securitization Facility contains similar covenants to the Multi-Currency Revolving Credit Facility, with which we were compliant as of March 31, 2023.We have an uncommitted, unsecured line of credit available to us pursuant to a revolving credit note ("Revolving Credit Note"). The Revolving Credit Note provides us with the ability to request short-term unsecured revolving credit loans from time to time in a principal amount not to exceed $75 million. The Revolving Credit Note may be decreased or terminated by the bank or us at any time without prior notice. We also have a £10 million uncommitted U.K. overdraft facility ("Overdraft Facility"), which expires in February 2024, to fund short-term normal trading cycle fluctuations related to our MWI Animal Health business. We have an uncommitted, unsecured line of credit available to us pursuant to a money market credit agreement ("Money Market Facility"). The Money Market Facility provides us with the ability to request short-term unsecured revolving credit loans from time to time in a principal amount not to exceed $100 million. The Money Market Facility may be decreased or terminated by the bank or us at any time without prior notice. Alliance Healthcare debt is comprised of uncommitted revolving credit facilities in various currencies with various rates. A majority of the outstanding borrowings were held in Egypt (which is 50% owned) as of March 31, 2023. These facilities are used to fund its working capital needs.Nonrecourse debt is comprised of short-term and long-term debt belonging to the Brazil subsidiary and is repaid solely from the Brazil subsidiary' cash flows and such debt agreements provide that the repayment of the loans (and interest thereon) is secured solely by the capital stock, physical assets, contracts, and cash flows of the Brazil subsidiary.
In May 2022, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program allowing us to purchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding shares of common stock, subject to market conditions. In the six months ended March 31, 2023, we purchased $778.8 million of our common stock, including $700 million from Walgreens Boots Alliance, Inc. These purchases excluded $28.4 million of purchases in September 2022 that cash settled in October 2022. As of March 31, 2023, we had $182.5 million of availability remaining under this program.In March 2023, our board of directors authorized a new share repurchase program allowing us to purchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding shares of common stock, subject to market conditions. No shares were purchased under this program as of March 31, 2023.In November 2022, our board of directors increased the quarterly dividend paid on common stock by 5% from $0.460 per share to $0.485 per share. We anticipate that we will continue to pay quarterly cash dividends in the future. However, the payment and amount of future dividends remains within the discretion of our board of directors and will depend upon future earnings, financial condition, capital requirements, and other factors.
As discussed and defined in Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, on July 21, 2021, it was announced that we and the two other national pharmaceutical distributors had negotiated a Distributor Settlement Agreement. The Distributor Settlement Agreement became effective on April 2, 2022, and as of March 31, 2023, it included 48 of 49 eligible states (the “Settling States”) as well as 99% by population of the eligible political subdivisions in the Settling States. Our remaining estimated liability related to the Distributor Settlement Agreement, the State of Alabama (with whom we have not reached a settlement agreement), and other opioid-related litigation for which we have reached settlement agreements is approximately $5.9 billion on our Consolidated Balance Sheet as of March 31, 2023 and is expected to be paid over the next 16 years. The payment of the aforementioned litigation liability has not and is not expected to have an impact on our ability to pay dividends.The following is a summary of our contractual obligations for future principal and interest payments on our debt, minimum rental payments on our noncancellable operating leases, and minimum payments on our other commitments as of March 31, 2023:
The 2017 Tax Act requires a one-time transition tax to be recognized on historical foreign earnings and profits. We expect to pay $139.0 million, net of overpayments and tax credits, related to the transition tax as of March 31, 2023, which is payable in installments over a six-year period, and commenced in January 2021. The transition tax commitment is included in "Other Commitments" in the above table.Our liability for uncertain tax positions was $528.3 million (including interest and penalties) as of March 31, 2023. This liability represents an estimate of tax positions that we have taken in our tax returns which may ultimately not be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. Since the amount and timing of any future cash settlements cannot be predicted with reasonable certainty, the estimated liability has been excluded from the above contractual obligations table. Our liability for uncertain tax positions as of March 31, 2023 primarily includes an uncertain tax benefit related to the legal accrual for litigation related to the distribution of prescription opioid pain medications, as disclosed in Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We have exposure to foreign currency and exchange rate risk from our non-U.S. operations. Our largest exposure to foreign exchange rates exists primarily with the U.K. Pound Sterling, the Euro, the Turkish Lira, the Egyptian Pound, the Brazilian Real, and the Canadian Dollar. We use forward contracts to hedge against the foreign currency exchange rate impact on certain intercompany receivable and payable balances. We may use derivative instruments to hedge our foreign currency exposure, but not for speculative or trading purposes. Revenue from our foreign operations during the six months ended March 31, 2023 was approximately 11% of our consolidated revenue.We have market risk exposure to interest rate fluctuations relating to our debt. We manage interest rate risk by using a combination of fixed-rate and variable-rate debt. The amount of variable-rate debt fluctuates during the year based on our working capital requirements. We had $678.1 million of variable-rate debt outstanding as of March 31, 2023. We periodically evaluate financial instruments to manage our exposure to fixed and variable interest rates. However, there are no assurances that such instruments will be available in the combinations we want and/or on terms acceptable to us. There were no such financial instruments in effect as of March 31, 2023.We also have market risk exposure to interest rate fluctuations relating to our cash and cash equivalents. We had $1,539.4 million in cash and cash equivalents as of March 31, 2023. The unfavorable impact of a hypothetical decrease in interest rates on cash and cash equivalents would be partially offset by the favorable impact of such a decrease on variable-rate debt. For every $100 million of cash invested that is in excess of variable-rate debt, a 10 basis point decrease in interest rates would increase our annual net interest expense by $0.1 million.Deterioration of general economic conditions, among other factors, could adversely affect the number of prescriptions that are filled and the amount of pharmaceutical products purchased by consumers and, therefore, could reduce purchases by our customers. In addition, volatility in financial markets may also negatively impact our customers' ability to obtain credit to finance their businesses on acceptable terms. Reduced purchases by our customers or changes in the ability of our customers to remit payments to us could adversely affect our revenue growth, our profitability, and our cash flow from operations.Recent elevated levels of inflation in the global and U.S. economies have impacted certain operating expenses. If elevated levels of inflation persist or increase, our operations and financial results could be adversely affected, particularly in certain global markets.We have risks from other geopolitical trends and events, such as the Russia-Ukraine war. Although the long-term implications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are difficult to predict at this time, the financial impact of the conflict has not been material.