
•Revenue increased $293 million, or 9% year over year.•Expenses increased $111 million, or 5% year over year.•Operating income of $1.5 billion increased $182 million, or 14%, year over year.•Operating ratio of 60.5% decreased 190 basis points versus prior year.•Earnings per diluted share of $0.48 increased $0.09, or 23%, year over year.
Total revenue increased 9% in first quarter 2023 when compared to first quarter 2022 primarily due to volume growth in coal and merchandise, higher fuel recovery, and pricing gains in merchandise and intermodal, partially offset by lower intermodal volume.
Chemicals - Decreased due to lower shipments of materials used in making plastics, partially offset by higher shipments of energy-related commodities. Agricultural and Food Products - Increased due to higher shipments of feed grain for both the domestic and export markets. Automotive - Increased due to higher North American vehicle production as semiconductor availability has improved.Minerals - Increased due to higher shipments of aggregates and cement driven by increased road construction and other infrastructure-related activities.  Forest Products - Increased due to higher shipments of building products, supported by strength in multi-family residential construction.  Metals and Equipment - Increased due to higher scrap and steel shipments, as well as stronger equipment shipments.  Fertilizers - Decreased due to declines in short-haul shipments, which were partially offset by slight increases in long-haul phosphate shipments.
Lower volume was primarily due to decreased international shipments driven by high inventory levels and lower imports. Domestic shipments also decreased primarily due to the impacts of a softening truck market.
Export coal increased due to higher shipments of metallurgical and thermal coal, partially due to the prior year impact from reduced capacity at Curtis Bay coal pier. Domestic coal increased due to higher shipments of utility coal including the benefit of replenishing stockpiles as well as higher steel and industrial shipments.
Trucking revenue increased $3 million versus prior year due to higher fuel surcharge.
Other revenue was $24 million lower primarily resulting from lower intermodal storage and equipment usage, partially offset by increases in demurrage and higher affiliate revenue.
Expenses of $2.2 billion increased $111 million, or 5%, in first quarter 2023 when compared to the first quarter 2022. Labor and Fringe expense increased $31 million due to the following: •An increase of $39 million was driven by inflation.•Incentive compensation costs decreased $31 million due to the impacts of accelerated expense for eligible employees in the prior year as well as lower expected payouts.•Other costs increased $23 million primarily due to increased headcount and training costs. Purchased Services and Other expense increased $13 million due to the following: •Operating support costs increased $35 million primarily as a result of inflation, higher scheduled locomotive maintenance costs and increased coal and merchandise volume. These increases were partially offset by lower intermodal expenses.•Other costs decreased $22 million as a $46 million insurance recovery and the impact of prior year environmental reserve adjustments were partially offset by the inclusion of Pan Am's operations and other non-significant items.Depreciation and Amortization expense increased $33 million primarily as the result of a 2022 equipment depreciation study as well as a larger asset base.Fuel costs increased $33 million primarily resulting from a 6% increase in locomotive fuel prices as well as higher fuel consumption.Equipment and Other Rents expense decreased $18 million primarily driven by lower net car hire costs resulting from improved days per load across all markets. Gains on Property Dispositions decreased to $8 million from $27 million in the prior year. First quarter 2022 included gains of $20 million related to the sale of property rights to the Commonwealth of Virginia under a multi-phase agreement.
Interest expense increased $22 million primarily due to higher average debt balances and higher interest rates.
Other income - net increased $15 million primarily due to higher interest income, partially offset by a decrease in net pension benefit credits.
Income tax expense increased $47 million mostly due to higher earnings before income taxes.
CSX reports its financial results in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (U.S. GAAP). CSX also uses certain non-GAAP measures that fall within the meaning of Securities and Exchange Commission Regulation G and Regulation S-K Item 10(e), which may provide users of the financial information with additional meaningful comparison to prior reported results.  Non-GAAP measures do not have standardized definitions and are not defined by U.S. GAAP. Therefore, CSX’s non-GAAP measures are unlikely to be comparable to similar measures presented by other companies. The presentation of these non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation from, as a substitute for, or as superior to the financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Reconciliations of non-GAAP measures to corresponding GAAP measures are below.
Management believes that free cash flow is supplemental information useful to investors as it is important in evaluating the Company’s financial performance. More specifically, free cash flow measures cash generated by the business after reinvestment. This measure represents cash available for both equity and bond investors to be used for dividends, share repurchases or principal reduction on outstanding debt. Free cash flow is calculated by using net cash from operations and adjusting for property additions and proceeds and advances from property dispositions. Free cash flow should be considered in addition to, rather than a substitute for, cash provided by operating activities. The decrease in free cash flow before dividends from the prior year of $160 million is due to higher property additions and less cash from operating activities.The following table reconciles cash provided by operating activities (GAAP measure) to free cash flow, before dividends (non-GAAP measure).
The Company is committed to continuous improvement in safety and service performance through training, innovation and investment. Training and safety programs are designed to prevent incidents that can adversely impact employees, customers and communities. Technological innovations that can detect and avoid many types of human factor incidents are designed to serve as an additional layer of protection for the Company's employees. Continued capital investment in the Company's assets, including track, bridges, signals, equipment and detection technology also supports safety performance.The FRA train accident rate of 3.47 in first quarter 2023 increased by 20% compared to prior year. The personal injury frequency index of 1.04 increased 27% compared to prior year. Safety is a guiding principle at CSX, and the Company remains focused on instilling safety culture, especially in new hires. CSX is committed to reducing risk and enhancing the overall safety of its employees, customers and communities in which the Company operates.
In first quarter 2023, velocity increased by 16% and dwell improved by 20% versus prior year. Carload trip plan performance and intermodal trip plan performance improved by 34% and 10%, respectively. Service metrics continue to improve with increased employee availability and engagement as well as effective execution of the operating plan.
Certain operating statistics are estimated and can continue to be updated as actuals settle. The methodology for calculating train velocity, dwell, cars online and trip plan performance differs from that used by the Surface Transportation Board. The Company will continue to report these metrics to the Surface Transportation Board using the prescribed methodology.
Train Velocity - Average train speed between origin and destination in miles per hour (does not include locals, yard jobs, work trains or passenger trains). Train velocity measures the profiled schedule of trains (from departure to arrival and all interim time), and train profiles are periodically updated to align with a changing operation.Dwell - Average amount of time in hours between car arrival to and departure from the yard.Cars Online - Average number of active freight rail cars on lines operated by CSX, excluding rail cars that are being repaired, in storage, those that have been sold, or private cars dwelling at a customer location more than one day. On-Time Originations - Percent of scheduled road trains that depart the origin yard on-time or ahead of schedule.On-Time Arrivals - Percent of scheduled road trains that arrive at the destination yard on-time to within two hours of scheduled arrival.Carload Trip Plan Performance - Percent of measured cars destined for a customer that arrive at or ahead of the original estimated time of arrival, notification or interchange (as applicable).Intermodal Trip Plan Performance - Percent of measured containers destined for a customer that arrive at or ahead of the original estimated time of arrival, notification or interchange (as applicable).Fuel Efficiency - Gallons of locomotive fuel per 1,000 gross ton-miles.Revenue Ton-Miles (RTM's) - The movement of one revenue-producing ton of freight over a distance of one mile.Gross Ton-Miles (GTM's) - The movement of one ton of train weight over one mile. GTM's are calculated by multiplying total train weight by distance the train moved. Total train weight is comprised of the weight of the freight cars and their contents. FRA Personal Injury Frequency Index - Number of FRA-reportable injuries per 200,000 man-hours. FRA Train Accident Rate - Number of FRA-reportable train accidents per million train-miles.
The following are material changes in the significant cash flows, sources of cash and liquidity, capital investments, consolidated balance sheets and working capital, which provide an update to the discussion included in CSX's most recent annual report on Form 10-K.
The following chart highlights the operating, investing and financing components of the net decreases of $667 million and $303 million in cash and cash equivalents for three months ended 2023 and 2022, respectively.
•Cash provided by operating activities decreased $48 million primarily driven by unfavorable working capital activities, including the payments of $232 million for retroactive wages and bonuses related to finalized labor agreements. This decrease was partially offset by higher cash-generating income.•Cash used in investing activities increased $112 million primarily as a result of higher property additions and higher net purchases of short-term investments.•Cash used in financing activities increased $204 million driven by higher debt repayments and increased share repurchases.
As of the end of first quarter 2023, CSX had $1.5 billion of cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments. CSX uses current cash balances for general corporate purposes, which may include capital expenditures, working capital requirements, reduction or refinancing of outstanding indebtedness, redemptions and repurchases of CSX common stock, dividends to shareholders, acquisitions and other business opportunities, and contributions to the Company's qualified pension plan. See Note 7, Debt and Credit Agreements. The Company has multiple sources of liquidity, including cash generated from operations and financing sources. The Company filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC on February 16, 2022, which may be used to issue debt or equity securities at CSX’s discretion, subject to market conditions and CSX Board authorization. While CSX seeks to give itself flexibility with respect to cash requirements, there can be no assurance that market conditions would permit CSX to sell such securities on acceptable terms at any given time, or at all. During the three months ended 2023, CSX did not issue any long-term debt.
CSX has a $1.2 billion unsecured, revolving credit facility backed by a diverse syndicate of banks that expires in February 2028. At March 31, 2023, the Company had no outstanding balances under this facility. The Company also has a commercial paper program, backed by the revolving credit facility, under which the Company may issue unsecured commercial paper notes up to a maximum aggregate principal amount of $1.0 billion outstanding at any one time. At March 31, 2023, the Company had no outstanding debt under the commercial paper program.Planned capital investments for 2023 are expected to be approximately $2.3 billion. Of the 2023 investment, approximately 75% is expected to be used to sustain the core infrastructure and operating equipment. The remaining amounts will be used to promote profitable growth, including projects supporting service enhancements and productivity. CSX intends to fund capital investments primarily through cash generated from operations.
Total assets decreased $434 million from year end primarily due to the $667 million decrease in cash as noted above. This decrease was partially offset by a $64 million increase in accounts receivable, $42 million of which relates to an insurance recovery, as well as a $51 million increase in net property consistent with planned capital expenditures.Total liabilities decreased $143 million from year end primarily due to a $340 million decrease in labor and fringe benefits payable and a $140 million decrease in current debt driven by the maturity of secured equipment notes. The decrease in labor and fringe benefits payable was driven by payouts of accrued retroactive wages and bonuses as well as incentive compensation. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in income and other taxes payable of $250 million due to the timing of tax payments. Total shareholders' equity decreased $291 million from year end primarily driven by share repurchases of $1.1 billion and dividends paid of $226 million, partially offset by net earnings of $987 million.Working capital is considered a measure of a company's ability to meet its short-term needs. CSX had a working capital surplus of $1.0 billion as of March 31, 2023 and $1.4 billion as of December 31, 2022. This decrease of $344 million since year end is primarily due to cash paid for share repurchases of $1.1 billion, property additions of $443 million and dividends paid of $226 million, partially offset by cash from operations. The Company's working capital balance varies due to factors such as the timing of scheduled debt payments and changes in cash and cash equivalent balances as discussed above. The Company continues to maintain adequate liquidity to satisfy current liabilities and maturing obligations when they come due. CSX has sufficient financial capacity, including its revolving credit facility, commercial paper program and shelf registration statement to manage its day-to-day cash requirements and any anticipated obligations. The Company from time to time accesses the credit markets for additional liquidity.
CSX is committed to returning cash to shareholders and maintaining an investment-grade credit profile. Capital structure, capital investments and cash distributions, including dividends and share repurchases, are reviewed at least annually by the Board of Directors. Management's assessment of market conditions and other factors guides the timing and volume of repurchases. Future share repurchases are expected to be funded by cash on hand, cash generated from operations and debt issuances.
On June 1, 2022, CSX acquired Pan Am for a purchase price of $600 million. The results of Pan Am's operations and its cash flows were consolidated prospectively.
On March 26, 2021, the Company entered into a comprehensive agreement to sell certain property rights in three CSX-owned line segments to the Commonwealth of Virginia (“Commonwealth”) over three phases. The timing and amount of gains recognized were based on the allocation of fair value to each conveyance, the timing of conveyances and collectability. Over the course of this transaction, which was completed in 2022, total proceeds of $525 million were collected and total gains of $493 million were recognized. A gain of $20 million was recognized in first quarter 2022 related to the closing of the second phase.
In 2007, CSXT, a wholly-owned subsidiary of CSX Corporation, issued in a registered public offering $381 million of equipment notes, which were fully and unconditionally guaranteed by CSX Corporation. These notes matured on January 15, 2023.In accordance with SEC rules, including amendments adopted in 2020, CSX is not required to present separate condensed consolidating financial information for wholly-owned subsidiaries who issued or guaranteed notes. Additionally, presentation of combined summary financial information regarding subsidiary issuers and guarantors is not required because the assets, liabilities and results of operations of the combined issuers and guarantors of the notes are not materially different from the corresponding amounts presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Approximately 17,300 of the Company's approximately 22,600 employees are members of a rail labor union. As of December 2, 2022, all 12 rail unions at CSX that participated in national bargaining were covered by national agreements with the Class I railroads and CSX-specific agreements that will remain in effect through December 31, 2024.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires that management make estimates in reporting the amounts of certain assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and certain revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from those estimates. These estimates and assumptions are discussed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors on a regular basis. Consistent with the prior year, significant estimates using management judgment are made for the areas below.  For further discussion of CSX's critical accounting estimates, see the Company's most recent annual report on Form 10-K.  •personal injury and environmental reserves;•pension plan accounting; •depreciation policies for assets under the group-life method; and•goodwill and other intangible assets.
Certain statements in this report and in other materials filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as information included in oral statements or other written statements made by the Company, are forward-looking statements. The Company intends for all such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and the provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act may contain, among others, statements regarding: •projections and estimates of earnings, revenues, margins, volumes, rates, cost-savings, expenses, taxes or other financial items;•expectations as to results of operations and operational initiatives;•expectations as to the effect of claims, lawsuits, environmental costs, commitments, contingent liabilities, labor negotiations or agreements on the Company's financial condition, results of operations or liquidity;•management's plans, strategies and objectives for future operations, capital expenditures, workforce levels, dividends, share repurchases, safety and service performance, proposed new services and other matters that are not historical facts, and management's expectations as to future performance and operations and the time by which objectives will be achieved; and•future economic, industry or market conditions or performance and their effect on the Company's financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.Forward-looking statements are typically identified by words or phrases such as "will," "should," “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “project,” “estimate,” “preliminary” and similar expressions. The Company cautions against placing undue reliance on forward-looking statements, which reflect its good faith beliefs with respect to future events and are based on information currently available to it as of the date the forward-looking statement is made. Forward-looking statements should not be read as a guarantee of future performance or results and will not necessarily be accurate indications of the timing when, or by which, such performance or results will be achieved.
Forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties and actual performance or results could differ materially from those anticipated by any forward-looking statements. The Company undertakes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement. If the Company does update any forward-looking statement, no inference should be drawn that the Company will make additional updates with respect to that statement or any other forward-looking statements. The following important factors, in addition to those discussed in Part I, Item 1A Risk Factors of CSX's most recent annual report on Form 10-K and elsewhere in this report, may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by any forward-looking statements: •legislative, regulatory or legal developments involving transportation, including rail or intermodal transportation, the environment, hazardous materials, taxation, international trade and initiatives to further regulate the rail industry;•the outcome of litigation, claims and other contingent liabilities, including, but not limited to, those related to fuel surcharge, environmental matters, taxes, shipper and rate claims subject to adjudication, personal injuries and occupational illnesses;•changes in domestic or international economic, political or business conditions, including those affecting the transportation industry (such as the impact of industry competition, conditions, performance and consolidation) and the level of demand for products carried by CSXT;•natural events such as severe weather conditions, including floods, fire, hurricanes and earthquakes, a pandemic crisis affecting the health of the Company's employees, its shippers or the consumers of goods, or other unforeseen disruptions of the Company's operations, systems, property, equipment or supply chain;•competition from other modes of freight transportation, such as trucking and competition and consolidation or financial distress within the transportation industry generally; •the cost of compliance with laws and regulations that differ from expectations as well as costs, penalties and operational and liquidity impacts associated with noncompliance with applicable laws or regulations;•the impact of increased passenger activities in capacity-constrained areas, including potential effects of high speed rail initiatives, or regulatory changes affecting when CSXT can transport freight or service routes;•unanticipated conditions in the financial markets that may affect timely access to capital markets and the cost of capital, as well as management's decisions regarding share repurchases; •changes in fuel prices, surcharges for fuel and the availability of fuel;•the impact of natural gas prices on coal-fired electricity generation;•the impact of global supply and price of seaborne coal on CSXT's export coal market;
•availability of insurance coverage at commercially reasonable rates or insufficient insurance coverage to cover claims or damages;•the inherent business risks associated with safety and security, including the transportation of hazardous materials or a cybersecurity attack which would threaten the availability and vulnerability of information technology; •adverse economic or operational effects from actual or threatened war or terrorist activities and any governmental response;•loss of key personnel or the inability to hire and retain qualified employees;•labor and benefit costs and labor difficulties, including stoppages affecting either the Company's operations or customers' ability to deliver goods to the Company for shipment;•the Company's success in implementing its strategic, financial and operational initiatives, including acquisitions;•the impact of conditions in the real estate market on the Company's ability to sell assets;•changes in operating conditions and costs, including the impacts of inflation, or commodity concentrations; •the impacts of a public health crisis and any policies or initiatives instituted in response; and•the inherent uncertainty associated with projecting economic and business conditions.Other important assumptions and factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements are specified elsewhere in this report and in CSX's other SEC reports, which are accessible on the SEC's website at www.sec.gov and the Company's website at www.csx.com.  The information on the CSX website is not part of this quarterly report on Form 10-Q.