
We provide differentiated development and manufacturing solutions for drugs, protein-based biologics, cell and gene therapies, vaccines, and consumer health products at over fifty facilities across four continents under rigorous quality and operational standards. Our oral, injectable, and respiratory delivery technologies, along with our state-of-the-art protein and cell and gene therapy manufacturing capacity, address a wide and growing range of modalities and therapeutic and other categories across the biopharmaceutical and consumer health industries. Through our extensive capabilities, growth-enabling capacity, and deep expertise in product development, regulatory compliance, and clinical trial supply, we can help our customers take products to market faster, and have done so for nearly half of new drug products approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) in the last decade. Our development and manufacturing platforms, our proven formulation, supply, and regulatory expertise, and our broad and deep development and manufacturing know-how enable our customers to advance and then bring to market more products and better treatments for patients and consumers. Our commitment to reliably supply our customers’ and their patients’ needs is the foundation for the value we provide; annually, we produce more than 80 billion doses for nearly 8,000 customer products, or approximately 1 in every 23 doses of such products taken each year by patients and consumers around the world. We believe that through our investments in state-of-the-art facilities and capacity expansion, including investments in facilities focused on new treatment modalities and other attractive market segments, our continuous improvement activities devoted to operational and quality excellence, the sales of existing and introduction of new customer products, and, in some cases, our innovation activities and patents, we will continue to attract premium opportunities and realize the growth potential from these areas.At the commencement of fiscal 2023, in connection with our change in Chief Executive Officer and Chief Operating Decision Maker, we adopted a new operating structure with two operating and reportable segments: (i) Biologics, and (ii) Pharma and Consumer Health. Our Biologics segment provides the same services as the segment we reported in fiscal 2022, with some organizational adjustments and the addition of analytical development and testing services for large molecules that we previously disclosed as part of our prior Oral and Specialty Delivery segment. The Biologics segment as reorganized provides development and manufacturing for biologic proteins; cell, gene, and other nucleic acid therapies; plasmid DNA; induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs); oncolytic viruses, and vaccines. It also provides formulation, development, and manufacturing for parenteral dose forms, including vials, prefilled syringes, and cartridges; and, as noted above, analytical development and testing services for large molecules. Our Pharma and Consumer Health segment, except as noted above, comprises the offerings of three of our prior reportable segments—Softgel and Oral Technologies, Oral and Specialty Delivery and Clinical Supply Services—and comprises the Company’s market-leading capabilities for complex oral solids, softgel formulations, Zydis® fast-dissolve technologies, and gummy, soft chew, and lozenge dosage forms; formulation, development, and manufacturing platforms for oral, nasal, inhaled, and topical dose forms; and clinical trial development and supply services. Prior-period segment results were reclassified to conform to the current period presentation.The following discussion and analysis gives effect to the revisions of our previously reported consolidated financial statements discussed in Note 1, Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Note 2, Revisions of Previously-Issued Financial Statements, which are part of the unaudited consolidated financial statements for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 (the “Consolidated Financial Statements”) located elsewhere in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q (the “Third Quarter Form 10-Q”).
On April 14, 2023, we issued a press release (the “April Press Release”) providing a business update that, among other things, we experienced productivity issues and higher-than-expected costs at three of our facilities, including two of our largest manufacturing facilities, during our third fiscal quarter ended March 31, 2023 and that such issues and costs incurred would materially and adversely impact our financial results for our third fiscal quarter and our outlook for the remainder of the 2023 fiscal year.One of the facilities that experienced productivity issues is our gene therapy manufacturing site located in Harmans, Maryland near the BWI airport (“BWI”), where our plans to increase capacity for a product during the third quarter in order to ramp production was slower than expected. During this ramp-up, certain operational challenges, significantly reduced the expected revenue in the third fiscal quarter associated with the site, and will also impact revenue previously expected in the fourth quarter.Timely resolution of these issues was delayed by the necessity of focusing site resources on important regulatory inspections involving the BWI site, which were successfully completed. None of these issues is expected to adversely impact the quality or commercial launch quantities of any product made at BWI in light of, among other things, the level of “bright stock” on hand. However, revenue from the unproduced batches cannot be made up for in this fiscal year due to manufacturing capacity constraints. We expect to recover related revenue in the second half of calendar year 2023 (the first half of our 2024 fiscal year). The April Press Release also announced that Ricky Hopson, who had been serving as our President, Division Head for Clinical Development & Supply, would assume the role of Senior Vice President and interim Chief Financial Officer, effective as of April 14, 2023 (the “Effective Date”), following the departure of Thomas Castellano as the Company’s Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer on April 13, 2023, with immediate effect. Mr. Castellano’s departure was not due to any disagreement with us, our board of directors (the “Board of Directors”), or management. The change of officers was not reflective of any concern with our audited consolidated financial statements.  In connection with Mr. Castellano’s departure, he also relinquished his role as principal financial officer and Mr. Hopson assumed the role of our principal financial officer as of the Effective Date.On May 8, 2023, we issued a press release (the “May 8 Press Release”) announcing, among other things, a delay in the release of our third fiscal quarter results and that we anticipated filing a Form 12b-25, Notification of Late Filing, with the SEC (the “Form 12b-25”) no later than May 11, 2023.  The May 8 Press Release also disclosed that we had identified significant issues with our forecasts and expected (i) to significantly reduce our fiscal 2023 net revenue and Adjusted EBITDA guidance by more than $400 million each and (ii) that our unaudited consolidated statement of operations and unaudited consolidated balance sheet would reflect a goodwill impairment of more than $200 million arising from our Consumer Health business, which is part of our Pharma and Consumer Health segment.On May 11, 2023, we filed the Form 12b-25, which noted that we required additional time to complete our preparation and review of our unaudited consolidated financial statements and other disclosures in the Third Quarter Form 10-Q, and to complete our quarterly closing processes and procedures for the reasons discussed above and therein.On May 19, 2023, we issued a press release (the “May 19 Press Release”) announcing, among other things, a further delay in the filing of the Third Quarter Form 10-Q and that we had received a notice (the “NYSE Notice”) from the New York Stock Exchange (the “NYSE”) that we were not in compliance with the NYSE’s continued listing requirements under the timely filing criteria established in Section 802.01E of the NYSE Listed Company Manual, because we did not timely file the Third Quarter Form 10-Q with the SEC.Contemporaneous with the filing of this Third Quarter Form 10-Q, we filed the Amended Fiscal 2022 10-K, which reflected the correction of an error to the net revenue we previously reported for fiscal 2022. All fiscal 2022 amounts reported in this Item 2 reflect the updated amounts set forth in the Amended Fiscal 2022 10-K. In addition, Note 2, Revisions to Previously Issued Financial Statements in our Consolidated Financial Statements notes that certain prior-period amounts reported in unaudited consolidated financial statements we previously issued have been reclassified to correct certain immaterial adjustments not previously reflected. All fiscal 2023 amounts reported in this Item 2 reflect these updated amounts.
We prepare our financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). Management made certain estimates and assumptions during the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements. These estimates also affect the reported amount of net earnings during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Because of the size of the financial statement elements to which they relate, some of our accounting policies and estimates have a more significant impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements than others.There was no material change to our critical accounting policies or in the underlying accounting assumptions and estimates from those described in our Amended Fiscal 2022 10-K.
Management measures operating performance based on consolidated earnings from operations before interest expense, expense for income taxes, and depreciation and amortization, adjusted for the income or loss attributable to non-controlling interests (“EBITDA from operations”). EBITDA from operations is not defined under U.S. GAAP, is not a measure of operating income, operating performance, or liquidity presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and is subject to important limitations.We believe that the presentation of EBITDA from operations enhances an investor’s understanding of our financial performance. We believe this measure is a useful financial metric to assess our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business and use this measure for business planning purposes. In addition, given the significant historical investments that we have made in property, plant, and equipment, depreciation and amortization expenses represent a meaningful portion of our cost structure. We believe that EBITDA from operations will provide investors with a useful tool for assessing the comparability between periods of our ability to generate cash from operations sufficient to pay taxes, to service debt, and to undertake capital expenditures because it eliminates depreciation and amortization expense. We present EBITDA from operations in order to provide supplemental information that we consider relevant for the readers of the Consolidated Financial Statements, and such information is not meant to replace or supersede U.S. GAAP measures. Our definition of EBITDA from operations may not be the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies. The most directly comparable measure to EBITDA from operations defined under U.S. GAAP is net earnings. Included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis is a reconciliation of net earnings to EBITDA from operations.In addition, we evaluate the performance of our segments based on segment earnings before non-controlling interests, other expense (income), impairments, restructuring costs, interest expense, income tax expense, and depreciation and amortization (“Segment EBITDA”). For a reconciliation of Segment EBITDA to net earnings, see Note 16, Segment Information to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
As exchange rates are an important factor in understanding period-to-period comparisons, we believe the presentation of results on a constant-currency basis in addition to reported results helps improve investors’ ability to understand our operating results and evaluate our performance in comparison to prior periods. Constant-currency information compares results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant period-over-period. We use results on a constant-currency basis as one measure to evaluate our performance. In this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, we compute constant currency by calculating current period results using prior period foreign currency exchange rates. We generally refer to such amounts calculated on a constant-currency basis as excluding the impact of foreign currency exchange. These results should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, results reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Results on a constant-currency basis, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and are not measures of performance presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Organic revenue growth and Segment EBITDA growth are measures we use to explain the underlying results and trends in the business. Organic revenue growth and Segment EBITDA growth are measures used to show current period sales and profitability from existing operations. Organic revenue growth and Segment EBITDA growth exclude the impact of foreign currency exchange, acquisitions of operating or legal entities, and divestitures within the applicable periods. These measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, performance measures reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These measures, as we present them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and are not measures of performance presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The pharmaceutical contract manufacturing industry is labor intensive. In addition, we incur significant fixed costs for facilities and other infrastructure required to obtain, develop, manufacture, transport, store, and test our products. Therefore, relatively small changes in demand can have a significant impact on short-term profitability.In the second quarter of fiscal 2023, we engaged in a restructuring effort, which reduced our cost structure, consolidated facilities, and optimized our infrastructure across the organization. In connection with these restructuring plans, during the nine months ended March 31, 2023, we reduced our headcount by approximately 700 employees and incurred $36 million of cumulative pre-tax employee separation and other restructuring related costs. As a result of our restructuring plans, we expect to deliver an annualized run-rate savings of $75 to $85 million.For further details regarding restructuring costs, see Note 9, Restructuring Costs, to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The below tables summarize several financial metrics we use to measure performance for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. Refer to the discussions below regarding performance and use of key financial metrics.
Results for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 were as follows:
* Not meaningfulChange % calculations are based on amounts prior to rounding
Net revenue decreased $216 million, or 17%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. Net revenue decreased 19% organically primarily due to a significant decline in demand for COVID-19 related programs, a decline in revenue from the manufacture of prescription products and a decline in demand for our consumer health products, primarily our wellness products, partially offset by growth in our clinical services and gene therapy offerings. Growth in our gene therapy offerings during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was muted by certain operational challenges, as detailed further under “—Recent Developments.” Net revenue increased 2% inorganically as a result of acquisitions. We acquired a cell therapy commercial manufacturing facility and operations near Princeton, New Jersey in April 2022 and Metrics Contract Services (“Metrics”) in October 2022.
Gross margin decreased $238 million, or 56%, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. On a constant-currency basis, gross margin, as a percentage of revenue, decreased 1,570 basis points to 17.5% in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 33.2% in the prior-year period, primarily due to inventory write-off charges in our Biologics segment, an unfavorable shift in product mix, inflationary pressures, operational challenges that meaningfully reduced productivity and higher costs due to increased spending on operational and engineering enhancements in our Biologics segment.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses decreased $14 million, or 7%, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The year-over-year decrease in selling, general, and administrative expenses was primarily due to a $9 million decline in employee-related costs, a $4 million decrease in stock-based compensation, a $4 million decrease in non-income taxes, partially offset by $7 million in net incremental expenses from businesses acquired in the last 12 months.
Goodwill impairment charges during the three months ended March 31, 2023 were associated with our Consumer Health reporting unit, which is part of our Pharma and Consumer Health segment. As of March 31, 2023, the estimated fair value of each of our other reporting units was in excess of its carrying value by at least 45%. A 200-basis point increase in the assumed discount rates utilized in each test would not have resulted in a goodwill impairment charge in any of those other reporting units. For further details, see Note 5, Goodwill to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other operating expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $9 million, or 172%, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The year-over-year increase in other operating expense, net was primarily due to a $6 million increase in restructuring charges primarily associated with our plan to reduce costs, consolidate facilities, and optimize infrastructure across the organization and a $3 million increase in fixed-asset impairment charges.
Interest expense, net of $51 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $18 million, or 53%, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The increase was primarily attributable to incremental interest expense on our most recent tranche of term loans and increased borrowing on our revolving credit facility.  For additional information concerning our debt and financing arrangements, including the changing mix of debt and equity in our capital structure, see “—Liquidity and Capital Resources” below and Note 6, Long-Term Obligations and Short-Term Borrowings to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other income, net of $4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by $4 million of foreign currency gains.Other expense, net of $2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily driven by $4 million of foreign currency losses.
Our benefit for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $55 million relative to loss before taxes of $282 million. Our provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was $35 million relative to earnings before income taxes of $176 million. The income tax benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2023 is primarily the result of a deferred tax benefit resulting from the impairment of goodwill during the quarter and certain discrete income tax benefits. This income tax benefit was partially reduced by unfavorable permanent tax adjustments that were fixed and not impacted by the reduced pretax earnings. Discrete items recognized during the quarter include a favorable audit settlement and equity-related compensation tax benefits. The quarterly benefit was also impacted by the geographic distribution of our pretax income resulting from our business mix, changes in the tax impact of permanent differences, restructuring, special items, certain equity-related compensation, and other discrete tax items that may have unique tax implications depending on the nature of the item.
The following charts depict the percentages of net revenue from each of our two reportable segments for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. Refer below for discussions regarding each segment’s net revenue and EBITDA performance and to “Non-GAAP Metrics” for a discussion of our use of Segment EBITDA, a measure that is not defined under U.S. GAAP.
Our results on a segment basis for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 were as follows:
Change % calculations are based on amounts prior to rounding.(1)    Unallocated costs include restructuring and special items, stock-based compensation, impairment charges, certain other corporate directed costs, and other costs that are not allocated to the segments as follows:
(a)    Restructuring and other special items during the three months ended March 31, 2023 include (i) restructuring charges associated with our plans to reduce costs, consolidate facilities, and optimize infrastructure across the organization and (ii) transaction and integration costs associated with our Metrics acquisition. Restructuring and other special items during the three months ended March 31, 2022 include integration costs primarily associated with the acquisition of Bettera Holdings, LLC (“Bettera Wellness”) in October 2021, and unrealized losses on venture capital investments.(b)    Goodwill impairment charges during the three months ended March 31, 2023 were associated with our Consumer Health reporting unit, which is part of our Pharma and Consumer Health segment. For further details, see Note 5, Goodwill to our consolidated financial statements.(c)    Refer to Note 8, Other (Income) Expense, Net to our consolidated financial statements for details of amounts recorded within other (income) expense, net in our Consolidated Financial Statements.Provided below is a reconciliation of net (loss) earnings to EBITDA from operations:
Biologics net revenue decreased by $222 million, or 32%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease was primarily driven by a significant decline in demand for COVID-19 related programs, partially offset by growth in our gene therapy offerings. Growth in our gene therapy offerings during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was muted by certain operational challenges as detailed further under “—Recent Developments.”Biologics Segment EBITDA decreased by $214 million, or 98%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease, similar to that of net revenue, was primarily driven by a significant decline in demand for COVID-19 related programs as well as inventory write-offs and operational challenges that meaningfully reduced productivity and higher costs due to increased spending on operational and engineering enhancements in our Biologics segment. We completed the acquisition of our Princeton facility and operations in April 2022. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, this acquisition had a negligible impact on the segment's net revenue and Segment EBITDA.
Pharma and Consumer Health net revenue increased by $6 million, or 1%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. Net revenue decreased 3% organically primarily driven by a decline in revenue from the manufacture of prescription products and a decline in our consumer health products, primarily in our wellness products, which were partially offset by growth in our clinical supply services.Pharma and Consumer Health Segment EBITDA decreased $13 million, or 10%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The organic portion of the decrease was driven by inflationary pressures and an unfavorable shift in product mix, where a decline in revenue from the manufacture of prescription products and a decline in our consumer health products, primarily in our wellness products, was partially offset by growth in our clinical supply services.We acquired Metrics in October 2022, which increased the segment's net revenue and Segment EBITDA on an inorganic basis by 4% and 5%, respectively, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the corresponding prior-year period.
The below tables summarize several financial metrics we use to measure performance for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and nine months ended March 31, 2022. Refer to the discussions below regarding performance and use of key financial metrics.
Results for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 were as follows:
*    Not meaningfulChange % calculations are based on amounts prior to rounding.
Net revenue decreased by $197 million, or 6%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022. Net revenue decreased 9% organically on a constant-currency basis, primarily related to a significant decline in demand for COVID-19 related programs and a decline in revenue from the manufacture of prescription products, partially offset by growth in our gene therapy offerings, as well as growth in our clinical supply services. Net revenue increased 3% inorganically as a result of acquisitions. We acquired RheinCell Therapeutics GmbH (“RheinCell”) in August 2021, Bettera Wellness in October 2021, our Princeton facility and operations in April 2022, and Metrics in October 2022.
Gross margin decreased by $298 million, or 26%, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, primarily due to an unfavorable shift in product mix, lower levels of utilization across the network, inventory write-offs, operational challenges that meaningfully reduced productivity, and higher costs from increased spending on operational and engineering enhancements in our Biologics segment. On a constant-currency basis, gross margin, as a percentage of revenue, decreased 710 basis points to 25.7% in the nine months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the corresponding prior-year period, primarily due to the factors described in the immediately preceding sentence.
Selling, general, and administrative expense was increased, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The year-over-year increase of $27 million in net incremental expenses from businesses acquired in the last 12 months and a $7 million increase in employee-related costs were offset by a $10 million decrease in bad debt expense, a $12 million decline in acquisition, transaction and integration costs, and a $7 million decrease in stock-based compensation.
Goodwill impairment charges during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were associated with our Consumer Health reporting unit, which is part of our Pharma and Consumer Health segment. For further details, see Note 5, Goodwill to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other operating expense of $40 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $14 million, or 50%, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The year-over-year increase was primarily due to a $31 million increase in restructuring charges, partially offset by $12 million decrease in fixed-asset impairment charges and a $4 million gain from sale of our former facility in Bolton, U.K.
Interest expense, net of $130 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $41 million, or 44%, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of foreign exchange. The increase was primarily attributable to incremental interest expense on our most recent tranche of term loans, increased borrowings on our revolving credit facility, and our U.S. dollar-denominated 3.500% senior notes due 2030.
Other income, net of $2 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by foreign currency gains of $5 million. Other expense, net for the nine months ended March 31, 2022 of $25 million was primarily driven by $28 million of foreign currency losses, and $4 million of financing charges related to our outstanding term loans, partially offset by a $2 million gain related to the change in fair value of the derivative liability arising from the dividend-adjustment mechanism of our formerly outstanding series A preferred stock.
Our benefit for income taxes for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was $19 million relative to loss before income taxes of $165 million. Our provision for income taxes for the nine months ended March 31, 2022 was $63 million relative to earnings before income taxes of $394 million. The current-year income tax benefit is primarily the result of a deferred tax benefit resulting from the impairment of goodwill during the quarter and certain discrete income tax benefits that included a favorable audit settlement and equity-related compensation benefits. This income tax benefit was partially offset by unfavorable permanent tax adjustments that were fixed and not impacted by the reduced pretax earnings and pretax losses in tax jurisdictions where we may not recognize a tax benefit. The nine-month benefit was also impacted by changes in the geographic distribution of our pretax income resulting from our business mix, the unfavorable impact of permanent differences, restructuring, special items, certain equity related compensation, and other discrete tax items that may have unique tax implications depending on the nature of the item.
The following charts depict the percentage of net revenue for each of our two reportable segments for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022. Refer below for discussions regarding each segment’s net revenue and EBITDA performance and to “Non-GAAP Metrics” for discussions of our use of Segment EBITDA and EBITDA from operations, measures that are not defined under U.S. GAAP.
Our results on a segment basis for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 were as follows:
Change % calculations are based on amounts prior to rounding.*Percentage not meaningful(1) Unallocated costs include restructuring and special items, stock-based compensation, gain on sale of subsidiary, impairment charges, certain other corporate-directed costs, and other costs that are not allocated to the segments as follows:
(a) Impairment charges and gain/loss on sale of assets during the nine months ended March 31, 2022 include fixed-asset impairment charges associated with a product we no longer manufacture in our Pharma and Consumer Health segment.(b) Restructuring and other special items during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 include (i) restructuring charges associated with our plans that reduced costs, consolidated facilities, and optimized our infrastructure across the organization, (ii) transaction and integration costs associated with the Metrics acquisition, and (iii) warehouse exit costs for a product we no longer manufacture in our Pharma and Consumer Health segment.Restructuring and other special items during the nine months ended March 31, 2022 include (i) transaction and integration costs associated with the acquisitions of Delphi Genetics SA, Hepatic Cell Therapy Support SA, RheinCell, and Bettera Wellness, and the manufacturing and packaging operations of Acorda Therapeutics, Inc., (ii) unrealized losses on venture capital investments, and (iii) restructuring costs associated with the closure of our Bolton, U.K. facility.(c) For the nine months ended March 31, 2022, gain on sale of subsidiary was due to the divestiture of our former facility in Woodstock, Illinois and the associated business. (d)    Goodwill impairment charges during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were associated with our Consumer Health reporting unit. For further details, see Note 5, Goodwill to our Consolidated Financial Statements. (e)    Refer to Note 8, Other (Income) Expense, Net to our consolidated financial statements for details of financing charges and foreign currency translation adjustments recorded within Other expense, net in our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Provided below is a reconciliation of net earnings to EBITDA from operations:
Net revenue in our Biologics segment decreased by $279 million, or 15%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease was primarily driven by a significant decline in demand for COVID-19 related programs, partially offset by strong growth in our gene therapy offerings. Biologics Segment EBITDA decreased by $282 million, or 48%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022. Segment EBITDA decreased 46%, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of acquisitions. The decrease was primarily driven by a significant decline in demand for COVID-19 related programs, inventory write-offs, lower levels of utilization across the Biologics network, as well as an unfavorable impact from remediation-related activities at our Brussels facility, which were partially offset by strong growth in our gene therapy offerings. We completed the acquisitions of RheinCell in August 2021 and our Princeton facility and operations in April 2022. For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, these acquisitions decreased Segment EBITDA on an inorganic basis by 2% compared to the corresponding prior-year period and had a negligible impact on the segment's net revenue.
Pharma and Consumer Health net revenue increased $81 million, or 5%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022. Net revenue decreased 1% compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of acquisitions. The decrease in organic revenue was primarily driven by a decline in revenue from the manufacture of prescription products and a decline in demand for our consumer health products, primarily our wellness products, partially offset by growth in our clinical supply services. Pharma and Consumer Health Segment EBITDA increased $2 million, or less than 1%, excluding the impact of foreign exchange, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022. Segment EBITDA decreased 6%, compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022, excluding the impact of acquisitions. The decrease in organic Segment EBITDA was primarily driven by inflationary pressures, a decline in demand for our consumer health products, and a decline in revenue from the manufacture of prescription products, which were partially offset by growth in our clinical supply services. We completed the Bettera Wellness acquisition in October 2021 and the Metrics acquisition in October 2022, which increased net revenue and Segment EBITDA on an inorganic basis by 6% during the nine months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the corresponding prior-year period.
Our principal sources of liquidity have been cash flows generated from operations and occasional capital market activities. The principal uses of cash are to fund operating and capital expenditures, business or asset acquisitions, interest payments on our debt, and any mandatory or discretionary principal payment on our debt. As of March 31, 2023, Catalent Pharma Solutions, Inc., our principal operating subsidiary (“Operating Company”), following the November 2022 execution of Amendment No. 7 to the amended and restated credit agreement, dated as of May 20, 2014, governing our senior secured credit facilities (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), which increased the capacity of our revolving credit facility to $1.10 billion and extended its maturity to November 2027, had available $546 million in borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility, due to $550 million in short-term borrowings outstanding and $4 million in letters of credit outstanding as of March 31, 2023. We have elected to classify the borrowing on our revolving credit facility as current as we intend to repay a portion of the borrowing using cash flow from operations and/or refinance the borrowing within the next twelve months.  We believe that our cash on hand, cash from operations, and available borrowings under our revolving credit facility will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs for at least the next 12 months, as well as the amounts expected to become due with respect to our pending capital projects.
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows:
For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, cash provided by operations was $58 million compared to $370 million in cash provided by operating activities for the nine months ended March 31, 2022. The year-over-year change was primarily due to a decrease in operating earnings, growth in inventory, an increase in interest payments due to higher outstanding debt balances, an unfavorable impact from the collection of trade receivables and an increase in severance payments related to our restructuring plans.
For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, cash used in investing activities was $834 million, compared to $1.49 billion for the nine months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease in cash used in investing activities was primarily driven by the decrease in payment for acquisitions and an increase in proceeds from the sale of marketable securities.
For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, cash provided by financing activities was $572 million, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $1.03 billion for the nine months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease in cash provided by financing activities was primarily driven by a $385 million decline in proceeds from borrowings.
The Credit Agreement contains a number of covenants that, among other things, restrict, subject to certain exceptions, our (and our restricted subsidiaries’) ability to incur additional indebtedness or issue certain preferred shares; create liens on assets; engage in mergers and consolidations; sell assets; pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock; repay subordinated indebtedness; engage in certain transactions with affiliates; make investments, loans, or advances; make certain acquisitions; enter into sale and leaseback transactions; amend material agreements governing our subordinated indebtedness; and change our lines of business.The Credit Agreement also contains change-of-control provisions and certain customary affirmative covenants and events of default. The revolving credit facility requires compliance with a net leverage covenant when there is a 30% or more draw outstanding at a period end. As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all material covenants under the Credit Agreement.Subject to certain exceptions, the Credit Agreement permits us and our restricted subsidiaries to incur certain additional indebtedness, including secured indebtedness. None of our non-U.S. subsidiaries or our Puerto Rico subsidiary is a guarantor of the loans.Under the Credit Agreement, our ability to engage in certain activities such as incurring certain additional indebtedness, making certain investments, and paying certain dividends is tied to ratios based on Adjusted EBITDA (which is defined as “Consolidated EBITDA” in the Credit Agreement). Adjusted EBITDA is based on the definitions in the Credit Agreement, is not defined under U.S. GAAP, and is subject to important limitations.
The several indentures governing each series of our outstanding senior notes (collectively, the “Indentures”) contain certain covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur or guarantee more debt or issue certain preferred shares; pay dividends on, repurchase, or make distributions in respect of their capital stock or make other restricted payments; make certain investments; sell certain assets; create liens; consolidate, merge, sell; or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of their assets; enter into certain transactions with their affiliates, and designate their subsidiaries as unrestricted subsidiaries. These covenants are subject to a number of exceptions, limitations, and qualifications as set forth in the Indentures. The Indentures also contain customary events of default, including, but not limited to, nonpayment, breach of covenants, and payment or acceleration defaults in certain other indebtedness of Operating Company or certain of its subsidiaries. Upon an event of default, either the holders of at least 30% in principal amount of each of the then-outstanding series of Senior Notes, or the applicable Trustee under the Indentures, may declare the applicable senior notes immediately due and payable; or in certain circumstances, the applicable senior notes will become automatically immediately due and payable. As of March 31, 2023, Operating Company was in compliance with all material covenants under the Indentures.
As market conditions warrant, we and our affiliates may from time to time seek to purchase our outstanding debt in privately negotiated or open-market transactions, by tender offer or otherwise. Subject to any applicable limitation contained in the Credit Agreement, any purchase made by us may be funded by the use of cash on hand or the incurrence of new secured or unsecured debt. The amounts involved in any such purchase transaction, individually or in the aggregate, may be material. Any such purchase may be with respect to a substantial amount of a particular class or series of debt, with the attendant reduction in the trading liquidity of such class or series. In addition, any such purchase made at prices below the “adjusted issue price” (as defined for U.S. federal income tax purposes) may result in taxable cancellation of indebtedness income to us, which amounts may be material, or in related adverse tax consequences to us.
As of March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022, our non-U.S. subsidiaries held cash and cash equivalents of $186 million and $377 million, respectively, out of the total consolidated cash and cash equivalents of $252 million and $449 million, respectively. These balances are dispersed across many locations around the world.
A portion of the debt used to finance our operations is exposed to interest-rate fluctuations. We may use various hedging strategies and derivative financial instruments to create an appropriate mix of fixed- and floating-rate assets and liabilities. In February 2021, we entered into an interest-rate swap agreement with Bank of America N.A. that acts as a hedge against the economic effect of a portion of the variable-interest obligation associated with our U.S. dollar-denominated term loans under our senior secured credit facilities, so that the interest payable on that portion of the debt becomes fixed at a certain rate, thereby reducing the impact of future interest-rate changes on future interest expense. The applicable rate for the U.S. dollar-denominated term loan under the Credit Agreement was LIBOR (subject to a floor of 0.50%) plus 2.00% as of March 31, 2023; however, as a result of this interest-rate swap agreement, the variable portion of the applicable rate on $500 million of the term loan was effectively fixed at 0.9985% as of February 2021.
We are exposed to fluctuations in the euro-U.S. dollar exchange rate on our investments in our operations in Europe. While we do not actively hedge against changes in foreign currency, we have mitigated the exposure of our investments in our European operations by denominating a portion of our debt in euros. At March 31, 2023, we had $895 million of euro-denominated debt outstanding that qualifies as a hedge of a net investment in European operations. Refer to Note 10, Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of net investment hedge activity in the period.From time to time, we may use forward foreign currency exchange contracts to manage our exposure to the variability of cash flows primarily related to the foreign exchange rate changes of future foreign currency transaction costs. In addition, we may use such contracts to protect the value of existing foreign currency assets and liabilities. Currently, we do not use any forward foreign currency exchange contracts. We continue to evaluate hedging opportunities for foreign currency in the future.
Other than short-term operating leases and outstanding letters of credit as discussed above, we do not have any material off-balance sheet arrangement as of March 31, 2023.