
Cognizant is one of the world’s leading professional services companies, engineering modern businesses and delivering strategic outcomes for our clients. We help clients modernize technology, reimagine processes and transform experiences so they can stay ahead in a fast-changing world. We tailor our services and solutions to specific industries with an integrated global delivery model that employs client service and delivery teams based at client locations and dedicated global and regional delivery centers. Our services include digital services and solutions, consulting, application development, systems integration, quality engineering and assurance, application maintenance, infrastructure and security as well as business process services and automation. Digital services continue to be an important part of our portfolio, aligning with our clients' focus on becoming data-enabled, customer-centric and differentiated businesses.Our services and solutions are organized into integrated practices. In the first quarter of 2023, we added an Industry Solutions Group practice, which leverages our domain expertise to help clients solve problems specific to their industry. This new practice has been added to our four existing practices: Core Technologies and Insights, Enterprise Platform Services, Intuitive Operations and Automation, and Software and Platform Engineering.
GAAP   Adjusted1
Revenue down $14 million or 0.3% from Q1 2022; up 1.5% in constant currency1Income from Operations down $22 million or 3.0% from Q1 2022Operating margin down 40 bps from Q1 2022Diluted EPS up $0.07 or 6.5% from Q1 2022Adjusted Diluted EPS1 up $0.03 or 2.8% from Q1 2022During the quarter ended March 31, 2023, revenues decreased by $14 million as compared to the quarter ended March 31, 2022, representing a decline of 0.3%, or growth of 1.5% on a constant currency basis1. On a constant currency basis, revenue growth was driven by our Health Sciences and Communications, Media and Technology segments partially offset by a revenue decline in our Financial Services segment, which was negatively impacted by weakness in the banking sector. Our recently completed acquisitions contributed 100 basis points to revenue growth, primarily benefiting our Products and Resources segment.Operating margin decreased to 14.6% for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 from 15.0% for the quarter ended March 31, 2022. Our 2023 operating margin was negatively impacted by increased compensation costs for our delivery personnel, partially offset by the benefits of both the depreciation of the Indian rupee against the U.S. dollar and pricing actions taken in 2022.1 Adjusted Diluted EPS and constant currency revenue growth are not measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, as applicable.As a global professional services company, we compete on the basis of the knowledge, experience, insights, skills and talent of our employees and the value they can provide to our clients. Our success is dependent, in large part, on our ability to keep our supply of skilled employees in balance with client demand. We closely monitor attrition trends focusing on the metric that we believe is most relevant to our business. This metric, which we refer to as Voluntary Attrition - Tech Services, includes all voluntary separations with the exception of employees in our Intuitive Operations and Automation practice. For the trailing twelve months ended March 31, 2023 our Voluntary Attrition - Tech Services was 23% as compared to 30% for the trailing twelve months ended March 31, 2022. We finished the first quarter of 2023 with approximately 351,500 employees as compared to 340,400 employees at the end of the first quarter of 2022.
We continue to expect the long-term focus of our clients to be on their digital transformation into software-driven, data-enabled, customer-centric and differentiated businesses. We believe clients will continue to contend with industry-specific changes driven by evolving digital technologies, uncertainty in the regulatory environment, industry consolidation and convergence as well as international trade policies and other macroeconomic factors, including the increasing uncertainty related to the global economy, which could affect their demand for our services. In 2023, we simplified our strategic priorities to the following:•Accelerate growth - achieve faster growth by shifting the mindset and operating rhythm of the company;•Become the employer of choice - steward and attract the best technology talent in the industry; and•Simplify operations - improve operational execution and efficiency to free up cash to fund people and growth investments.Guided by these priorities, in the second quarter of 2023, we initiated the NextGen program aimed at simplifying our operating model, optimizing corporate functions and consolidating and realigning office space to reflect the post-pandemic hybrid work environment. Our drive for simplification will include operating with fewer layers in an effort to enhance agility and enable faster decision making. We expect the savings generated by the program to help fund continued investments in our people, revenue growth opportunities and the modernization of our office space.In connection with the NextGen program, we expect to record costs of approximately $400 million with approximately $350 million of such costs anticipated in 2023 and approximately $50 million in 2024. This consists of approximately $200 million of employee severance and other costs primarily related to non-billable and corporate personnel, which we expect to mostly incur in 2023, and approximately $200 million of costs related to the consolidation of office space, with approximately $150 million in 2023 and $50 million in 2024. We expect the personnel-related actions of this program to impact approximately 3,500 employees. The estimates of the charges and expenditures that we expect to incur in connection with the NextGen program, and the timing thereof, are subject to a number of assumptions, including local law requirements in various jurisdictions, and actual amounts may differ materially from estimates. In addition, we may incur other charges or cash expenditures not currently contemplated due to unanticipated events that may occur in connection with the NextGen program. In addition to the NextGen program, potential tax law and other regulatory changes, including possible U.S. corporate income tax reform and potentially increased costs for employment and post-employment benefits in India as a result of the Code on Social Security, 2020, among other items, may impact our future results.
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, certain financial data for the three months ended March 31:
(a)Exclusive of depreciation and amortization expense.
During the quarter ended March 31, 2023, revenues decreased by $14 million as compared to the quarter ended March 31, 2022, representing a decline of 0.3%, or growth of 1.5% on a constant currency basis2. Our recently completed acquisitions contributed 100 basis points to revenue growth. 2Adjusted Diluted EPS and constant currency revenue growth are not measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information and reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures, as applicable.
Revenues of $4,812 million were as follows for the three months ended March 31, 2023:
Revenues across all of our segments and geographic markets were negatively impacted by foreign currency exchange rate movements. In addition, reduced demand for discretionary work negatively impacted revenues, particularly among banking clients in our Financial Services segment globally, retail and consumer goods clients in our Products and Resources segment in North America and clients in our Communications, Media and Technology segment in North America. Recently completed acquisitions contributed 250 basis points of growth to our Products and Resources segment (primarily in North America) and 190 basis points of growth to our Communications, Media and Technology segment (primarily in the United Kingdom).3In addition:•Revenue growth in the United Kingdom was driven by the expansion of work with our public sector clients in the Financial Services segment;•Revenue growth in our Health Sciences segment in North America benefited from increased demand from healthcare payer clients for our integrated software solutions; •Revenues in the Communications, Media and Technology segment reflected growing demand from our technology clients for services related to digital content, primarily driven by the largest clients in this segment; and •Constant currency revenue growth in the Continental Europe region was driven by automotive clients within the Products and Resources segment.3 Constant currency revenue growth is not a measure of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for more information.
Our cost of revenues consists primarily of salaries, incentive-based compensation, stock-based compensation expense, employee benefits, project-related immigration and travel for technical personnel, subcontracting and equipment costs relating to revenues. The increase, as a percentage of revenues, was due to higher compensation costs for delivery personnel (including employees and subcontractors), partially offset by the benefit of the depreciation of the Indian rupee against the U.S. dollar.
SG&A expenses consist primarily of salaries, incentive-based compensation, stock-based compensation expense, employee benefits, immigration, travel, marketing, communications, management, finance, administrative and occupancy costs. The decrease, as a percentage of revenues, was primarily due to the beneficial impact of foreign currency exchange rate movements and the optimization of non-strategic SG&A expenses, partially offset by higher compensation costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased by 7.7%, or 0.3% as a percentage of revenues, during the first quarter of 2023 as compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily driven by a reduction in amortization expense due to certain intangible assets reaching the end of their useful lives.
Our 2023 first quarter operating margin was negatively impacted by increased compensation costs for our delivery personnel, partially offset by the benefits of both the depreciation of the Indian rupee against the U.S. dollar and pricing actions taken in 2022.
A predominant portion of our costs in India are denominated in the Indian rupee, representing approximately 23% of our global operating costs during the three months ended March 31, 2023. These costs are subject to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which have an impact on our results of operations. We enter into foreign exchange derivative contracts to hedge certain Indian rupee denominated payments in India. These hedges are intended to mitigate the volatility of the changes in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Indian rupee. Net of the impact of the hedges, the depreciation of the Indian rupee contributed 119 basis points to the improvement in our operating margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.Excluding the impact of applicable designated cash flow hedges, the depreciation of the Indian rupee against the U.S. dollar positively impacted our operating margin by 171 basis points during the three months ended March 31, 2023. Each additional 1.0% change in exchange rate between the Indian rupee and the U.S. dollar will have the effect of moving our operating margin by 18 basis points (excluding the impact of the hedges). The settlement of our cash flow hedges negatively impacted our operating margin by 25 basis points during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to a positive impact of 27 basis points during the three months ended March 31, 2022.
In the first quarter of 2023, we made certain changes to the internal measurement of segment operating profit for the purpose of evaluating segment performance and resource allocation. The primary reason for the change was to reflect a more complete cost of delivery. Specifically, segment operating profit now includes an allocation of both SG&A costs related to our integrated practices and the excess or shortfall of incentive-based compensation for commercial and delivery employees as compared to target, which were previously included in "unallocated costs." We have reported 2023 segment operating profits using the new allocation methodology and have recast the 2022 results to conform to the new methodology. Segment operating profit and operating margin percentage were as follows:
Segment operating profit%Segment operating marginIn 2023, segment operating margins across all our segments were negatively impacted by increased compensation costs for our delivery personnel, partially offset by the benefits of both the depreciation of the Indian rupee against the U.S. dollar and pricing actions taken in 2022. In addition, 2023 segment operating margin in:•Health Sciences benefited from higher margin integrated software solutions for healthcare payer clients;•Products and Resources was negatively impacted by costs related to recent acquisitions; and•Communications, Media and Technology was negatively affected by a decrease in utilization due to a slowdown in revenue growth among our largest customers in this segment.Total segment operating profit and operating margin were as follows for the three months ended March 31:
The following table sets forth total other income (expense), net for the three months ended March 31:
The foreign currency exchange losses were attributed to the remeasurement of net monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the functional currencies of our subsidiaries. The gains on foreign exchange forward contracts not designated as hedging instruments related to the realized and unrealized gains and losses on contracts entered into to offset our foreign currency exposures. As of March 31, 2023, the notional value of our undesignated hedges was $1,505 million. The increase in interest income and interest expense was primarily attributable to higher interest rates in the current period.
The effective income tax rate decreased primarily due to the discrete benefit of the effective settlement of the IRS examination for tax years 2017 and 2018 as described in Note 7 to our unaudited consolidated financial statements.
The increase in net income was primarily driven by higher interest income and a lower effective tax rate, partially offset by lower income from operations.
Portions of our disclosure include non-GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles and should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures should be read in conjunction with our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. The reconciliations of non-GAAP financial measures to the corresponding GAAP measures set forth below should be carefully evaluated. Our non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted Diluted EPS excludes unusual items, net non-operating foreign currency exchange gains or losses and the tax impact of all the applicable adjustments. The income tax impact of each item excluded from Adjusted Diluted EPS is calculated by applying the statutory rate and local tax regulations in the jurisdiction in which the item was incurred. Constant currency revenue growth is defined as revenues for a given period restated at the comparative period’s foreign currency exchange rates measured against the comparative period's reported revenues.We believe providing investors with an operating view consistent with how we manage the Company provides enhanced transparency into our operating results. For internal management reporting and budgeting purposes, we use various GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures for financial and operational decision-making, to evaluate period-to-period comparisons, to determine portions of the compensation for executive officers and for making comparisons of our operating results to those of our competitors. We believe that the presentation of non-GAAP financial measures, which exclude certain costs, read in conjunction with our reported GAAP results and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measure, as applicable, can provide useful supplemental information to our management and investors regarding financial and business trends relating to our financial condition and results of operations.A limitation of using non-GAAP financial measures versus financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP is that non-GAAP financial measures may exclude costs that are recurring such as net non-operating foreign currency exchange gains or losses. In addition, other companies may calculate non-GAAP financial measures differently than us, thereby limiting the usefulness of these non-GAAP financial measures as a comparative tool. We compensate for these limitations by providing specific information regarding the GAAP amounts excluded from non-GAAP financial measures to allow investors to evaluate such non-GAAP financial measures.The following table presents a reconciliation of each non-GAAP financial measure to the most comparable GAAP measure for the three months ended March 31:
(1)Non-operating foreign currency exchange gains and losses, inclusive of gains and losses on related foreign exchange forward contracts not designated as hedging instruments for accounting purposes, are reported in "Foreign currency exchange gains (losses), net" in our unaudited consolidated statements of operations.(2)Presented below are the tax impacts of our non-GAAP adjustment to pre-tax income:
The effective tax rate related to non-operating foreign currency exchange gains and losses varies depending on the jurisdictions in which such income and expenses are generated and the statutory rates applicable in those jurisdictions. As such, the income tax effect of non-operating foreign currency exchange gains and losses shown in the above table may not appear proportionate to the net pre-tax foreign currency exchange gains and losses reported in our unaudited consolidated statements of operations.
Our cash generated from operations has historically been the primary source of liquidity to fund operations and investments to grow our business. As of March 31, 2023, we had cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $2,481 million and available capacity under our credit facilities of approximately $2,000 million. The following table provides a summary of cash flows for the three months ended March 31:
The increase in cash provided by operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily driven by improved collections of our trade accounts receivable.We monitor turnover, aging and the collection of accounts receivable by client. Our DSO calculation includes receivables, net of allowance for doubtful accounts, and contract assets, reduced by the uncollected portion of deferred revenue. Our DSO was 73 days as of March 31, 2023, a decrease of 1 day from 74 days as of December 31, 2022. Our DSO was 72 days as of March 31, 2022, an increase of 3 days from 69 days as of December 31, 2021.
Cash used in investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by payments for business combinations partially offset by net maturities of investments. Cash provided by investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily driven by net maturities of investments.
The decrease in cash used in financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily driven by lower repurchases of common stock.The Credit Agreement provides for a $650 million Term Loan and a $1,850 million unsecured revolving credit facility, which are each due to mature in October 2027. We are required under the Credit Agreement to make scheduled quarterly principal payments on the Term Loan beginning in December 2023. As of March 31, 2023, we had no outstanding balance on the revolving credit facility. See Note 6 to our unaudited consolidated financial statements. In March 2023, our India subsidiary renewed its working capital facility at 15 billion Indian rupee ($183 million at the March 31, 2023 exchange rate). This facility requires us to repay any balances drawn down within 90 days from the date of disbursement. There is a 1.0% prepayment penalty applicable to payments made within 30 days after disbursement. This working capital facility contains affirmative and negative covenants and may be renewed annually. As of March 31, 2023, we have not borrowed funds under this facility or any of its predecessor facilities.
AcquisitionsShare RepurchasesDividend payments
We review our capital allocation on an ongoing basis, considering our financial performance and liquidity position, investments required to execute our strategic plans and initiatives, acquisition opportunities, the economic outlook, regulatory changes and other relevant factors. As these factors may change over time, the actual amounts expended on stock repurchase activity, dividends, and acquisitions, if any, during any particular period cannot be predicted and may fluctuate from time to time.
We seek to ensure that our worldwide cash is available in the locations in which it is needed. As part of ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of domestic and international cash flows and cash balances. We evaluate on an ongoing basis what portion of the non-U.S. cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments is needed locally to execute our strategic plans and what amount is available for repatriation back to the United States.We expect operating cash flows, cash and short-term investment balances, together with the available capacity under our revolving credit facilities, to be sufficient to meet our operating requirements, including purchase commitments, making Tax Reform Act transition tax payments and servicing our debt for the next twelve months. The ability to expand and grow our business in accordance with current plans, make acquisitions, meet long-term capital requirements beyond a twelve-month period and execute our capital return plan will depend on many factors, including the rate, if any, at which cash flow increases, our ability and willingness to pay for acquisitions with capital stock and the availability of public and private debt, including the ability to extend the maturity or refinance our existing debt, and equity financing. We cannot be certain that additional financing, if required, will be available on terms and conditions acceptable to us, if at all.
See Note 11 to our unaudited consolidated financial statements.
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our unaudited consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported for assets and liabilities, including the recoverability of tangible and intangible assets, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. The most significant estimates relate to the recognition of revenue and profits, including the application of the cost-to-cost method of measuring progress to completion for certain fixed-price contracts, income taxes, business combinations and valuation of goodwill and other long-lived assets. We base our estimates on historical experience, current trends and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. The actual amounts may differ from the estimates used in the preparation of the accompanying unaudited consolidated financial statements. For a discussion of our critical accounting estimates, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the audited consolidated financial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
There have been no changes in the information provided regarding recently adopted and new accounting pronouncements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.