
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to be a narrative explanation of the financial statements and other statistical data that should be read in conjunction with the accompanying financial statements to enhance an investor’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. Our objectives are: (i) to provide a narrative explanation of our financial statements that will enable investors to see the Company through the eyes of management; (ii) to enhance the overall financial disclosure and provide the context within which financial information should be analyzed; and (iii) to provide information about the quality of, and potential variability of, our earnings and cash flows so that investors can ascertain the likelihood of whether past performance is indicative of future performance.
We are a geographically diversified gaming and hospitality company that was founded in 1973 by the Carano family with the opening of the Eldorado Hotel Casino in Reno, Nevada. Beginning in 2005, we grew through a series of acquisitions, including the acquisition of MTR Gaming Group, Inc. in 2014, Isle of Capri Casinos, Inc. in 2017, Tropicana Entertainment, Inc. in 2018, Caesars Entertainment Corporation in 2020, and William Hill PLC on April 22, 2021. Our ticker symbol on the NASDAQ Stock Market is “CZR.”We own, lease or manage an aggregate of 51 domestic properties in 16 states with approximately 52,100 slot machines, video lottery terminals and e-tables, approximately 2,800 table games and approximately 47,200 hotel rooms as of March 31, 2023. In addition, we have other domestic and international properties that are authorized to use the brands and marks of Caesars Entertainment, Inc., as well as other non-gaming properties. Our primary source of revenue is generated by our casino properties’ gaming operations, our retail and online sports betting, as well as our online gaming, and we utilize our hotels, restaurants, bars, entertainment, racing, retail shops and other services to attract customers to our properties. As of March 31, 2023, we owned 20 of our casinos and leased 25 casinos in the U.S. We lease 18 casinos from VICI Properties L.P., a Delaware limited partnership (“VICI”), pursuant to a regional lease, a Las Vegas lease and a Joliet lease (the “VICI Leases”). In addition, we lease six casinos from GLP Capital, L.P., the operating partnership of Gaming and Leisure Properties, Inc. (“GLPI”) pursuant to a Master Lease (as amended, the “GLPI Master Lease”) and a Lumière lease associated with our Horseshoe St. Louis property (together with the GLPI Master Lease, the “GLPI Leases”) and lease the Rio All-Suite Hotel & Casino from a separate third party. We also operate and conduct sports wagering across 30 jurisdictions in North America, 22 of which offer mobile sports betting, and operate regulated online real money gaming in six jurisdictions in North America. Our Caesars Sportsbook app operates on the Liberty platform and we maintain other technology platforms that we intend to migrate to the Liberty platform in the future, subject to required approvals. The map below illustrates Caesars Digital’s presence as of March 31, 2023:
In 2022 we partnered with NYRABets LLC, the official online wagering platform of the New York Racing Association, Inc., and launched the Caesars Racebook app which operates in 13 states as of March 31, 2023. The Caesars Racebook app provides access for pari-mutuel wagering at over 300 racetracks around the world as well as livestreaming of races. Wagers placed can earn credits towards our Caesars Rewards loyalty program or points which can be redeemed for free wagering credits.We are also in the process of expanding our Caesars Digital footprint into other states in the near term with our Caesars Sportsbook and Caesars Racebook apps as jurisdictions legalize or provide necessary approvals. No customers under 21 years old are allowed to wager on any of our Caesars Sportsbook, Caesars Racebook and iGaming mobile apps.We periodically divest of assets in order to raise capital, as a result of a determination that the assets are not core to our business, or due to regulatory requirement. A summary of recently completed divestitures of our properties as of March 31, 2023 is as follows:
*Not meaningful.
In April 2018, we entered into a joint venture with Cordish Companies (“Cordish”) to plan and develop a mixed-use entertainment and hospitality destination expected to be located on unused land adjacent to the casino at our Pompano property. As the managing member, Cordish will operate the business and manage the development, construction, financing, marketing, leasing, maintenance and day-to-day operation of the various phases of the project. Additionally, Cordish will be responsible for the development of the master plan for the project with our input and will submit it for our review and approval. While we hold a 50% variable interest in the joint venture, we are not the primary beneficiary; as such the investment in the joint venture is accounted for using the equity method. We participate evenly with Cordish in the profits and losses of the joint venture, which are included in Transaction and other costs, net on our Statements of Operations. As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, our investment in the joint venture was $81 million and $80 million, respectively, and is recorded in Investments in and advances to unconsolidated affiliates on the Balance Sheets. We have no further obligation to contribute additional real estate or cash as of March 31, 2023.
We held an investment in NeoGames S.A., a global leader of iLottery solutions and services to national and state-regulated lotteries, and other investments. On March 14, 2022, we sold our investment at fair value for $26 million and recorded a loss of $34 million during the three months ended March 31, 2022, which is included within Other income on the Statements of Operations.
Segment results in this MD&A are presented consistent with the way our management reviews operating results, assesses performance and makes decisions on a “significant market” basis. Management views each of the Company’s casinos as an operating segment. Operating segments are aggregated based on their similar economic characteristics, types of customers, types of services and products provided, and their management and reporting structure. Our principal operating activities occur in four reportable segments: (1) Las Vegas, (2) Regional, (3) Caesars Digital, and (4) Managed and Branded, in addition to Corporate and Other.
The presentation of financial information herein for the periods after the sale of our recently completed divestitures, described above, is not fully comparable to the periods prior to their respective sale dates.This MD&A is intended to provide information to assist in better understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations. Our historical operating results may not be indicative of our future results of operations because of the factors described in the preceding paragraph and the changing competitive landscape in each of our markets, including changes in market and societal trends, as well as by factors discussed elsewhere herein. We recommend that you read this MD&A in conjunction with our unaudited Financial Statements and the notes to those statements included in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
Our primary source of revenue is generated by our gaming operations, our retail and online sports betting, as well as our online gaming. Additionally, we utilize our hotels, restaurants, bars, entertainment venues, retail shops, racing and other services to attract customers to our properties. Our operating results are highly dependent on the volume and quality of customers staying at, or visiting, our properties and using our sports betting and iGaming applications. Key performance metrics include volume indicators such as drop or handle, which refer to amounts wagered by our customers. The amount of volume we retain, which is not fully controllable by us, is recognized as casino revenues and is referred to as our win or hold. Slot win percentage is typically in the range of approximately 9% to 11% of slot handle for both the Las Vegas and Regional segments. Table game hold percentage is typically in the range of approximately 16% to 23% of table game drop in both the Las Vegas and Regional segments. Sports betting hold is typically in the range of 5% to 9% and iGaming hold typically ranges from 3% to 4%. In addition, hotel occupancy, which is the average percentage of available hotel rooms occupied during a period, is a key indicator for our hotel business in the Las Vegas segment. See “Results of Operations” section below. Complimentary rooms are treated as occupied rooms in our calculation of hotel occupancy. The key metrics we utilize to measure our profitability and performance are Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin.
The following summary highlights the significant factors impacting our financial results for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:•Weather and Construction Disruptions – During the three months ended March 31, 2023, our Regional segment was negatively impacted by severe winter weather, particularly in northern Nevada, which caused poor and unsafe travel conditions reducing visitation to our Lake Tahoe and Reno properties. Additionally, in late August 2020, our Regional segment was negatively impacted by Hurricane Laura, causing severe damage to Isle of Capri Casino Hotel Lake Charles. As a result of the damage, the property remained closed during the construction of our new land-based casino, Horseshoe Lake Charles, which was completed and reopened in December 2022. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we received insurance proceeds to replace damaged property which were in excess of the respective carrying value of the damaged assets, resulting in a gain of $38 million which is included in Transaction and other costs, net in our Statements of Operations. •Caesars Sportsbook and Caesars Racebook – As new states and jurisdictions have legalized sports betting, we have made varying degrees of upfront investments which have been executed through marketing campaigns and promotional incentives to acquire new customers and establish our presence in the new state or jurisdiction. In connection with the launch of our Caesars Sportsbook app in the state of New York and Louisiana in January 2022, we experienced negative net revenue in the first quarter of 2022 resulting from a substantial amount of bonus cash and matched deposits issued to customers as sign-on incentives, which exceeded our gaming win. We continue to adjust our level of investment during the launch period in new jurisdictions based, in part, on prior experience and do not expect such investment to continue at elevated levels subsequent to the initial launch period. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, promotional and marketing expenses have significantly decreased as a result of these efforts, as compared to the prior year period. •Economic Factors Impacting Discretionary Spending – Gaming and other leisure activities we offer represent discretionary expenditures which may be sensitive to economic downturns, such as the resurgence of the Omicron variant of COVID-19 that negatively impacted the first quarter of 2022. We also monitor the recent trends, including higher inflation and interest rates, and the related effects on our customers, and our operations. •Divestitures and Discontinued Operations – See “Overview” section above for detail on properties divested, including related discontinued operations.
The following table highlights the results of our operations:
Net revenues were as follows:
Consolidated net revenues increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to improved gaming volumes, particularly in the Las Vegas segment, and increased occupancy and room rates due to strong leisure, group and convention demand. Additionally, in December 2022, Horseshoe Lake Charles reopened after its closure in 2020 due to severe damage from Hurricane Laura. Net revenues within the Caesars Digital segment increased significantly versus the prior year period due to a reduction in promotional allowances for new state launches coupled with higher hold. The Omicron variant of COVID-19 negatively impacted prior year results during the first quarter of 2022, including disruptions to convention and banquets, as well as disruptions to scheduled concert events. The Company continues to remain strategic with expanded partnerships with iconic entertainers to put on concerts and performances, and celebrity chefs to offer new food and beverage venues and menu options. Inclement weather across the country, particularly in northern Nevada, restricted travel and negatively offset these results.
Operating expenses were as follows:
Casino expenses consist principally of salaries and wages associated with our gaming operations, gaming taxes and marketing and promotions costs attributable to our Caesars Digital segment. Food and beverage expenses consist principally of salaries and wages and costs of goods sold associated with our food and beverage operations. Hotel expenses consist principally of salaries, wages and supplies associated with our hotel operations. Other expenses consist principally of salaries and wages, costs of goods sold and professional talent fees associated with our retail, entertainment and other operations. Casino expenses decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same prior year period as the first quarter of 2022 included significant advertising costs directly attributable to our Caesars Digital segment, due to promotion of our Caesars Sportsbook app and its expansion into new jurisdictions. Operating expenses have increased in connection with increased revenues, however, we continue to focus on labor efficiencies to manage rising labor costs and strategically manage our marketing and promotional spend to reduce our casino expenses. Similarly, we continue to manage recent increases in food costs by focusing on efficiencies within food and beverage venues and menu options.General and administrative expenses include items such as information technology, facility maintenance, utilities, property and liability insurance, expenses for administrative departments such as accounting, compliance, purchasing, human resources, legal, internal audit, property taxes and marketing expenses indirectly related to our gaming and non-gaming operations. General and administrative expenses have remained comparable to the prior year period.Transaction and other costs, net increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same prior year period, mainly due to a gain of approximately $38 million recorded in the first quarter of 2022 as proceeds received for the Isle of Capri Casino Hotel Lake Charles property damage were in excess of the respective carrying value of the assets.
Other income (expenses) were as follows:
Interest expense, net increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same prior year period due to rising interest rates related to our variable rate debt. Further, our financing obligations related to our VICI Leases contain annual escalators, including escalators based on the Consumer Price Index (“CPI”), which take effect in November of each year and have resulted in increased interest expense year over year.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, loss on extinguishment of debt was related to the early prepayments of the Caesars Resort Collection (“CRC”) Term Loan and the CRC Incremental Term Loan.The income tax benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2023 differed from the expected income tax benefit based on the federal tax rate of 21% primarily due to state deferred tax benefits generated from net operating losses becoming available due to elections to treat certain subsidiary corporations as disregarded entities for income tax purposes. The income tax benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2022 differed from the expected income tax benefit based on the federal tax rate of 21% primarily due to nondeductible expenses and state income taxes.When there is a recent history of operating losses and negative normalized earnings and a return to operating profitability has not yet been demonstrated, we cannot rely on projections of future taxable earnings for purposes of assessing recoverability of our deferred tax assets. In such cases, we use systematic and logical methods to estimate when deferred tax liabilities will reverse and generate taxable income and when deferred tax assets will reverse and generate tax deductions. Our most significant deferred tax asset relates to the failed sale-leaseback obligation with VICI and GLPI. The reversal of this deferred tax asset requires judgment and estimates and has a material impact on the determination of the amount of valuation allowance required.As of March 31, 2023, we have provided a valuation allowance on a portion of our deferred tax assets that we believe will not be realized on a more likely than not basis. However, we have recently observed positive trends in our operating results and if these trends continue, in the foreseeable future we may determine that we will be able to realize a significant portion of these deferred tax assets. A future reversal of the valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets could result in an income tax benefit of $0.9 billion to $1.2 billion.
Las Vegas segment’s net revenues, net income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to the resurgence of the Omicron variant of COVID-19 which negatively impacted prior year results. Increased visitation drove higher hotel occupancy, room rates and higher food and beverage and entertainment revenues as compared to the prior year period. Group and conventions were also negatively impacted by COVID-19 in the first quarter of 2022 but have recovered strongly versus the prior year. Our food and beverage revenues are driven by higher restaurant covers and improved product mix with recent additions of casual and premier dining venues. Entertainment revenues have also increased as compared to the same prior year period, which included show cancellations and postponements due to the resurgence of the Omicron variant of COVID-19.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, slot win percentage in the Las Vegas segment was within our typical range.
Regional segment’s net revenues increased slightly for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to prior period, primarily due to the reopening of Horseshoe Lake Charles in the fourth quarter of 2022 and recovery from the resurgence of the Omicron variant of COVID-19 in the first quarter of 2022. In addition, our Regional segment also experienced net revenue growth due to improved food and beverage offerings, increased entertainment revenues and an increase in banquets. These increases were offset by the negative impact from severe winter weather, particularly in northern Nevada, where poor and unsafe travel conditions resulted from significant snowfall that reduced visitation to our Lake Tahoe and Reno properties. We also continue to monitor our competitive environment resulting from the opening of new casino resorts in the Chicagoland area and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. As a result of these disruptions, net income and Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin decreased compared to the same prior year period.Slot win percentage in the Regional segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was within our typical range.
Caesars Digital includes the operations for retail and mobile sports betting, online casino, poker, and horse racing, which includes our Caesars Sportsbook, Caesars Racebook and iGaming mobile apps. Caesars Digital’s net revenues, net loss, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA margin improved for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the prior period, primarily due lower year over year promotional offerings for new state launches, coupled with higher sports betting hold. We experienced negative net revenue in the first quarter of 2022 as a result of increased promotional offerings for new state launches in New York and Louisiana. We continue to refine our promotional intensity during the launch period in new jurisdictions based, in part, on prior experience and do not expect such investment to continue at elevated levels subsequent to initial launch periods. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, promotional and marketing expenses decreased significantly as a result of these efforts, as compared to the prior year period.During the three months ended March 31, 2023, Caesars Digital began operations in Massachusetts and Ohio. In contrast to our prior year launch in New York and Louisiana, we utilized past experience and applied more modest strategies to target our level of investment into these new jurisdictions to maximize the return on our promotional offerings. As sports betting and online casinos expand through increased state legalization and customer adoption, variations in hold percentages and increases in marketing and promotional costs in highly competitive markets during promotional periods may negatively impact Caesars Digital’s net revenues, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin in comparison to current or prior periods. Sports betting and iGaming hold percentages in the Caesars Digital segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were within our typical range.
We manage several properties and license rights to the use of certain of our brands. These revenue agreements typically include reimbursement of certain costs that we incur directly. Such costs are primarily related to payroll costs incurred on behalf of the properties under management. The revenue related to these reimbursable management costs has a direct impact on our evaluation of Adjusted EBITDA margin which, when excluded, reflects margins typically realized from such agreements. The table below presents the amount included in net revenues and total operating expenses related to these reimbursable costs.
Adjusted EBITDA (described below), a non-GAAP financial measure, has been presented as a supplemental disclosure because it is a widely used measure of performance and basis for valuation of companies in our industry and we believe that this non-GAAP supplemental information will be helpful in understanding our ongoing operating results. Management has historically used Adjusted EBITDA when evaluating operating performance because we believe that the inclusion or exclusion of certain recurring and non-recurring items is necessary to provide a full understanding of our core operating results and as a means to evaluate period-to-period results. Adjusted EBITDA represents net income (loss) before interest income or interest expense net of interest capitalized, (benefit) provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, (gain) loss on investments and marketable securities, stock-based compensation, impairment charges, equity in (income) loss of unconsolidated affiliates, (gain) loss on the sale or disposal of property and equipment, (gain) loss related to divestitures, changes in the fair value of certain derivatives and transaction costs associated with our acquisitions and divestitures such as (gain) loss on sale, sign-on and retention bonuses, severance expense, business integration and optimization costs, contract exit or termination costs, certain litigation awards and settlements, and certain regulatory settlements. Adjusted EBITDA also excludes the expense associated with certain of our leases as these transactions were accounted for as financing obligations and the associated expense is included in interest expense. Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of performance or liquidity calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). It is unaudited and should not be considered an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income (loss) as an indicator of our operating performance. Uses of cash flows that are not reflected in Adjusted EBITDA include capital expenditures, interest payments, income taxes, debt principal repayments, payments under our leases with affiliates of GLPI and VICI and certain regulatory gaming assessments, which can be significant. As a result, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of our liquidity. Other companies that provide EBITDA information may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do. The definition of Adjusted EBITDA may not be the same as the definitions used in any of our debt agreements.The following tables summarize our Adjusted EBITDA for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, in addition to reconciling net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA in accordance with GAAP (unaudited):
We are a holding company, and our only significant assets are ownership interests in our subsidiaries. Our ability to fund our obligations depends on existing cash on hand, contracted asset sales, cash flows from our subsidiaries and our ability to raise capital. Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are existing cash on hand, cash flows from operations, availability of borrowings under our revolving credit facilities, proceeds from the issuance of debt and equity securities and proceeds from completed asset sales. Our cash requirements may fluctuate significantly depending on our decisions with respect to business acquisitions or divestitures and strategic capital and marketing investments. As of March 31, 2023, our cash on hand and revolving borrowing capacity was as follows:
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, our operating activities generated cash inflows of $174 million, as compared to operating cash outflows of $246 million during the three months ended March 31, 2022, due to the results of operations described above.On February 6, 2023, we entered into an Incremental Assumption Agreement No. 2 pursuant to which we incurred a new senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $2.5 billion (the “CEI Term Loan B” and, together with the CEI Term Loan A, the “CEI Term Loans”) as a new term loan under the CEI Credit Agreement. The CEI Term Loan B requires scheduled quarterly amortization payments in amounts equal to 0.25% of the original aggregate principal amount of the CEI Term Loan B, with the balance payable at maturity. Borrowings under the CEI Term Loan B bear interest at a rate equal to, at the Company’s option, either (a) a forward-looking term rate based on the Adjusted Term SOFR, subject to a floor of 0.50% or (b) a base rate (the “Base Rate”) determined by reference to the highest of (i) the Prime Rate in the United States, (ii) the federal funds rate plus 0.50% per annum and (iii) the one-month Adjusted Term SOFR plus 1.00% per annum, in each case, plus an applicable margin. Such applicable margin is 3.25% per annum in the case of any Adjusted Term SOFR loan and 2.25% per annum in the case of any Base Rate loan, subject to one 0.25% step-down based on our net total leverage ratio. The CEI Term Loan B was issued at a price of 99.0% of the principal amount and will mature in February 2030.On February 6, 2023, concurrently with the issuance of the CEI Term Loan B, we issued $2.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 7.00% senior secured notes (the “CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2030”) pursuant to an indenture by and among the Company, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto from time to time, U.S. Bank Trust Company, National Association, as trustee, and U.S. Bank National Association, as collateral agent. The CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2030 rank equally with all existing and future first-priority lien obligations of the Company and the subsidiary guarantors. The CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2030 will mature in February 2030, with interest paid semi-annually on February 15 and August 15 of each year, commencing August 15, 2023.The net proceeds from the CEI Term Loan B, along with the net proceeds from the issuance of the CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2030 described above, were used to repay the outstanding principal balance, including accrued and unpaid interest, of both the CRC Term Loan and the CRC Incremental Term Loan. Upon the termination of the CRC Term Loan and the CRC Incremental Term Loan, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $197 million.On May 1, 2023, we elected to prepay the outstanding $400 million Convention Center Mortgage Loan utilizing cash on hand. We expect that our primary capital requirements going forward will relate to the expansion and maintenance of our properties, taxes, servicing our outstanding indebtedness, and rent payments under our GLPI Master Lease, the VICI Leases and other leases. We make capital expenditures and perform continuing refurbishment and maintenance at our properties to maintain our quality standards. Our capital expenditure requirements for the remainder of 2023 include expansion projects, the rebranding of certain properties, implementation and migration of our Caesars Sportsbook and iGaming apps in certain states to our Liberty platform, and continued investment into new markets with our Caesars Sportsbook and iGaming applications in our Caesars Digital segment. In addition, we may, from time to time, seek to repurchase or prepay our outstanding indebtedness. Any such purchases or prepayments may be funded by existing cash balances or the incurrence of debt. The amount and timing of any repurchase will be based on business and market conditions, capital availability, compliance with debt covenants and other considerations.We continue to expand into new markets with projects such as our partnership with the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians to build and develop Caesars Virginia which is estimated to open in late 2024. The development has a budget of $650 million and is expected to include a premier destination resort casino along with a 500 room hotel and world-class casino floor including 1,300 slot machines, 85 live table games, a WSOP Poker Room, a Caesars Sportsbook, a live entertainment theater and 40,000 square feet of meeting and convention space. Additionally, Caesars announced plans to expand into Nebraska with the development of a Harrah’s casino and racetrack. The casino development is expected to feature a new one-mile horse racing surface, a 40,000-square-foot-casino and sportsbook with more than 400 slot machines and 20 table games, as well as a restaurant and retail space. During the construction of Caesars Virginia and Harrah’s in Nebraska, we anticipate opening and operating temporary facilities during 2023 while the permanent facilities are completed.In 2020, we funded $400 million in escrow to provide funds for a three year capital expenditure plan in the state of New Jersey. As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the restricted cash balance remaining in the escrow account was $88 million and $118 million, respectively, for future capital expenditures in New Jersey. The capital plan includes significant room renovations at both Caesars Atlantic City and Harrah’s Atlantic City, as well as the addition of new celebrity partnered restaurants. This amount is currently included in restricted cash in Other assets, net. As a condition of the extension of the casino operating contract and ground lease for Harrah’s New Orleans, we are also required to make a capital investment of $325 million on or around Harrah’s New Orleans by July 15, 2024. The capital investment will involve the rebranding of the property to Caesars New Orleans which includes a renovation and full interior and exterior redesign, updated casino floor, new culinary experiences and a new 340-room hotel tower. The project has a current capital plan of approximately $430 million and, as of March 31, 2023, total capital expenditures have been $145 million since the project began.Cash spent for capital expenditures totaled $272 million and $210 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, related to our growth, renovation, maintenance, and other capital projects. The following table summarizes our capital expenditures for the three months ended March 31, 2023, and an estimated range of capital expenditures for the remainder of 2023:
A significant portion of our liquidity needs are for debt service and payments associated with our leases. Our estimated debt service (including principal and interest) is approximately $601 million for the remainder of 2023. We also lease certain real property assets from third parties, including VICI and GLPI. The VICI Leases are subject to annual escalations based on the Consumer Price Index (“CPI”). The increase in the CPI over the prior year resulted in an increase in our annual lease payments to VICI, which took effect in November 2022. We estimate our lease payments to VICI and GLPI to be approximately $1.0 billion for the remainder of 2023. We have periodically divested assets to raise capital or, in previous cases, to comply with conditions, terms, obligations or restrictions imposed by antitrust, gaming and other regulatory entities. If the agreed upon selling price for future divestitures does not exceed the carrying value of the assets, we may be required to record additional impairment charges in future periods which may be material.We expect that our current liquidity, cash flows from operations, availability of borrowings under committed credit facilities and proceeds from the announced asset sales will be sufficient to fund our operations, capital requirements and service our outstanding indebtedness for the next twelve months.
The Senior Credit Facilities, the CEI Term Loan B, the Baltimore Term Loan, the Baltimore Revolving Credit Facility and the indentures governing the CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2025, the CEI Senior Secured Notes due 2030, the CEI Senior Notes due 2027, the CRC Senior Secured Notes and the CEI Senior Notes due 2029 contain covenants which are standard and customary for these types of agreements. These include negative covenants, which, subject to certain exceptions and baskets, limit our ability to (among other items) incur additional indebtedness, make investments, make restricted payments, including dividends, grant liens, sell assets and make acquisitions.Following the Third Amendment, the Amended CEI Revolving Credit Facility and the CEI Term Loan A include a maximum net total leverage ratio financial covenant of 7.25:1 until December 31, 2024 and 6.50:1 from and after December 31, 2024. In addition, the Amended CEI Revolving Credit Facility and the CEI Term Loan A include a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio financial covenant of 1.75:1 until December 31, 2024 and 2.0:1 from and after December 31, 2024. From and after the repayment of the CEI Term Loan A, the financial covenants applicable to the Amended CEI Revolving Credit Facility will be tested solely to the extent that certain testing conditions are satisfied. The Baltimore Revolving Credit Facility includes a net senior secured leverage ratio financial covenant of 5.0:1. Failure to comply with such covenants could result in an acceleration of the maturity of indebtedness outstanding under the relevant debt document. The GLPI Leases and VICI Leases contain certain covenants requiring minimum capital expenditures based on a percentage of net revenues along with maintaining certain financial ratios.As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all of the applicable financial covenants described above.
In November 2018, our Board of Directors authorized a $150 million common stock repurchase program (the “Share Repurchase Program”) pursuant to which we may, from time to time, repurchase shares of common stock on the open market (either with or without a 10b5-1 plan) or through privately negotiated transactions. The Share Repurchase Program has no time limit and may be suspended or discontinued at any time without notice. There is no minimum number of shares of common stock that we are required to repurchase under the Share Repurchase Program.As of March 31, 2023, we have acquired 223,823 shares of common stock under the Share Repurchase Program at an aggregate value of $9 million and an average of $40.80 per share. No shares were repurchased during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
There have been no other material changes during the three months ended March 31, 2023 to our contractual obligations as disclosed in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. See Note 7 to our unaudited Financial Statements, which is included elsewhere in this report, for additional information regarding contractual obligations.
We are faced with certain contingencies, from time to time, involving litigation, claims, assessments, environmental remediation or compliance. These commitments and contingencies are discussed in greater detail in “Part II, Item 1. Legal Proceedings” and Note 7 to our unaudited Financial Statements, both of which are included elsewhere in this report. See “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors—Risks Related to Our Business” which is included elsewhere in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Our critical accounting policies disclosures are included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. There have been no material changes since December 31, 2022. We have not substantively changed the application of our policies, and there have been no material changes in assumptions or estimation techniques used as compared to those described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
We do not currently have any off-balance sheet arrangements.