
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the interim Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes to enhance the understanding of the Company’s operations and present business environment. Components of management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations include:•Overview•Result of Operations•Segment Results•Changes in Financial Condition
DuPont is a global innovation leader with technology-based materials and solutions that help transform industries and everyday life by applying diverse science and expertise to help customers advance their best ideas and deliver essential innovations in key markets including electronics, transportation, building and construction, healthcare and worker safety. As of March 31, 2023, the Company has $6.6 billion of working capital and approximately $4.8 billion in cash and cash equivalents. The Company expects its cash and cash equivalents, cash generated from operations, and ability to access the debt capital markets to provide sufficient liquidity and financial flexibility to meet the liquidity requirements associated with its continuing operations. Outlined below are recent developments and material historical transactions impacting this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
On November 1, 2022, DuPont completed the divestiture of the majority of its historical Mobility & Materials segment, including the Engineering Polymers business line and select product lines within the Advanced Solutions and Performance Resins business lines (the “M&M Divestiture”), to Celanese Corporation (“Celanese”). The divestiture was pursuant to the Transaction Agreement (the "Transaction Agreement") with Celanese entered on February 17, 2022 and announced on February 18, 2022. The Company also announced on February 18, 2022, that its Board of Directors approved the divestiture of the Delrin® acetal homopolymer (H-POM) business (the “Delrin® Divestiture”), subject to entry into a definitive agreement and satisfaction of customary closing conditions, (the Delrin® Divestiture and together with the M&M Divestiture, collectively the "M&M Divestitures” and the businesses in scope of the M&M Divestitures collectively the "M&M Businesses"). As of March 31, 2023, the Company anticipates a closing date for the sale of Delrin® by the end of 2023. The Company determined that the M&M Businesses met the criteria to be classified as held for sale and that the sale represents a strategic shift that has a major effect on the Company’s operations and results.The financial position of DuPont as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, present the businesses to be divested as part of the Delrin® Divestiture, as discontinued operations. The results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023, present the financial results of Delrin® as discontinued operations. The results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2022, present the financial results of the M&M Businesses as discontinued operations. The cash flows and comprehensive income of the M&M Businesses have not been segregated and are included in the interim Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and interim Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income, respectively, for all periods presented. Unless otherwise indicated, the information in the notes to the interim Consolidated Financial Statements refer only to DuPont's continuing operations and do not include discussion of balances or activity of the M&M Businesses. See Note 3 to the interim Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In the first quarter 2023, DuPont continued to experience the impact of adverse macroeconomic factors including an inflationary environment and demand declines in consumer facing markets, including China. The ultimate extent to which these macroeconomic factors will continue to impact DuPont's results is not known.
On February 6, 2023, the Board of Directors declared a first quarter 2023 dividend of $0.36 per share, which was paid on March 15, 2023, to shareholders of record on February 28, 2023.On April 19, 2023, the Company announced that its Board declared a second quarter dividend of $0.36 per share payable on June 15, 2023, to shareholders of record on May 31, 2023.
The following table summarizes sales variances by segment and geographic region from the prior year:
1.Corporate & Other includes activities of the Retained Businesses, Biomaterials and previously divested businesses. 2.Europe, Middle East and Africa.The Company reported net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 of $3.0 billion, down 8 percent from $3.3 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022, due to a 7 percent decrease in volume, a 3 percent unfavorable currency impact, and a 2 percent decrease in portfolio actions, partially offset by a 4 percent increase in local price and product mix. Volume decrease was driven by Electronics & Industrial (down 15 percent). Currency was down 3 percent compared with the same period last year, driven by EMEA (down 4 percent) and Asia Pacific (down 4 percent). Portfolio and other changes decreased by 2 percent driven by declines within Corporate & Other (down 14 percent) primarily due to the sale of Biomaterials in May 2022. Local price and product mix increase was driven by Water & Protection (up 6 percent) Corporate & Other (up 5 percent) and Electronics & Industrial (up 2 percent). Local price and product mix increased across all regions.
Cost of sales was $2.0 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, down slightly from $2.1 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Cost of sales decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to decreased sales volume and currency impacts, primarily within the Asia Pacific and EMEA regions, partially offset by higher raw material costs globally.Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was 66 percent compared with 64 percent for the three months ended March 31, 2022.
R&D expenses totaled $127 million in the first quarter of 2023, down from $143 million in the first quarter of 2022. R&D as a percentage of net sales was consistent period over period at 4 percent for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
SG&A expenses were $340 million in the first quarter of 2023, down from $389 million in the first quarter of 2022. SG&A as a percentage of net sales was fairly consistent period over period at 11 percent and 12 percent for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Amortization of intangibles was $147 million in the first quarter of 2023, down from $153 million in the first quarter of 2022. The decrease for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared with the same period of the prior year was primarily due to currency fluctuations.
Restructuring and asset related charges - net were $14 million in the first quarter of 2023, down from $101 million in the first quarter of 2022. The activity in the first quarter of 2023 is primarily related to the 2022 Restructuring Program. The charges in the first quarter of 2022 include a $94 million impairment charge of an equity method investment and a $7 million charge related to the 2021 Restructuring Actions.See Note 5 to the interim Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Acquisition, integration and separation costs, primarily consist of financial advisory, information technology, legal, accounting, consulting and other professional advisory fees. The Company recorded no costs related to continuing operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and recorded costs of $8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. For the three months ended March 31, 2022, these costs were primarily associated with the execution of activities related to strategic initiatives including the acquisition of Laird PM and the now terminated previously announced agreement to acquire the outstanding shares of Rogers Corporation ("Terminated Intended Rogers Acquisition").See Note 3 to the interim Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The Company's share of the earnings of nonconsolidated affiliates was $15 million in the first quarter of 2023, down from $26 million in the first quarter of 2022. The decrease for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to 2022 is primarily due to lower equity earnings across the portfolio.
Sundry income (expense) - net includes a variety of income and expense items such as foreign currency exchange gains or losses, interest income, dividends from investments, gains and losses on sales of investments and assets, non-operating pension and other post-employment benefit plan credits or costs, and certain litigation matters. Sundry income (expense) - net in the first quarter of 2023 was income of $29 million compared with income of $3 million in the first quarter of 2022. The first quarter of 2023 primarily related to a benefits related to the finalization of a gain on sale of a business of $6 million, interest income of $46 million, partially offset by foreign currency exchange losses of $20 million. The first quarter of 2022 included income related to non-operating pension and other post-employment benefit credits of $7 million, partially offset by foreign currency exchange losses of $5 million.
Interest expense was $95 million and $120 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The decrease in interest expense is primarily due to the redemption of $2.5 billion fixed-rate long-term senior unsecured notes due 2023 in November 2022.
The Company's effective tax rate fluctuates based on, among other factors, where income is earned and the level of income relative to tax attribute. The effective tax rate on continuing operations for the first quarter of 2023 was 23.3 percent, compared with an effective tax rate of 16.8 percent for the first quarter of 2022. The lower effective tax rate for the first quarter of 2022 principally the resulted of a $94 million impairment charge on an equity method investment which resulted in a tax benefit of $29 million.
Effective February 2022, the revenues and certain expenses of the M&M Businesses are classified as discontinued operations in the current and historical periods. In addition, the Auto Adhesives & Fluids, MultibaseTM and Tedlar® product lines within the historical Mobility & Materials segment (the "Retained Businesses") are not included in the scope of the M&M Divestitures. Effective with the signing of the Transaction Agreement, the Retained Businesses were realigned to Corporate & Other. The reporting changes have been retrospectively reflected for all periods presented.The costs of the M&M Businesses that are classified as discontinued operations include only direct operating expenses incurred prior to the November 1, 2022 M&M Divestiture and costs which the Company will no longer incur upon the close of the Delrin® Divestiture. Indirect costs, such as those related to corporate and shared service functions previously allocated to the M&M Businesses, do not meet the criteria for discontinued operations and remain reported within continuing operations. A portion of these indirect costs related to activities the Company continues to undertake post-closing of the M&M Divestiture, and for which it is and will be reimbursed (“Future Reimbursable Indirect Costs”). In addition, a portion of these indirect costs relate to activities the Company intends to perform post the close of the Delrin® Divestiture and for which it will be reimbursed. Future Reimbursable Indirect Costs are reported within continuing operations but are excluded from operating EBITDA as defined below. The remaining portion of these indirect costs are not subject to future reimbursement (“Stranded Costs”). Stranded Costs are reported within continuing operations in Corporate & Other and are included within Operating EBITDA.The Company's measure of profit/loss for segment reporting purposes is Operating EBITDA as this is the manner in which the Company's chief operating decision maker ("CODM") assesses performance and allocates resources. The Company defines Operating EBITDA as earnings (i.e., “Income from continuing operations before income taxes") before interest, depreciation, amortization, non-operating pension / OPEB benefits / charges, and foreign exchange gains / losses, excluding Future Reimbursable Indirect Costs, and adjusted for significant items. Reconciliations of these measures can be found in Note 20 to the interim Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Electronics & Industrial segment is a leading global supplier of differentiated materials and systems for a broad range of consumer electronics including mobile devices, television monitors, personal computers and electronics used in a variety of industries. The segment is a leading provider of materials and solutions for the fabrication and packaging of semiconductors and integrated circuits and provides innovative solutions for thermal management and electromagnetic shielding as well as metallization processes for metal finishing, decorative, and industrial applications. Electronics & Industrial is a leading provider of platemaking systems and photopolymer plates for the packaging graphics industry, digital printing inks and cutting-edge materials for the manufacturing of displays for organic light emitting diode ("OLED"). In addition, the segment produces innovative engineering polymer solutions, high performance parts, medical silicones and specialty lubricants.
Electronics & Industrial net sales were $1,296 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, down 16 percent from $1,536 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Net sales decreased due to a 15 percent volume decline, 2 percent unfavorable currency impact, and a 1 percent decrease in portfolio, partially offset by a 2 percent increase in local price. Volume declines in Interconnect Solutions related to decreased consumer spending on consumer electronics, channel inventory destocking and slower recovery in China. Volume declines in Semiconductor Technologies were driven by reduced semiconductor fab utilization rates and channel inventory destocking. Within Industrial Solutions, volume gains in aerospace and healthcare industrial-end markets were partially offset by lower demand in printing and packaging end-markets, as well as weakness in display and LED applications.Operating EBITDA was $362 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, down 24 percent compared with $476 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to volume declines.
The Water & Protection segment is a leading provider of engineered products and integrated systems for a number of industries including worker safety, water purification and separation, aerospace, energy, medical packaging and building materials. The segment satisfies the growing global needs of businesses, governments, and consumers for solutions that make life safer, healthier, and better. By uniting market-driven science with the strength of highly regarded brands, the segment strives to bring new products and solutions to solve customers' needs faster, better and more cost effectively.
Water & Protection net sales were $1,449 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, up 1 percent from $1,429 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Net sales increased due to a 6 percent increase in local price, partially offset by a 3 percent unfavorable currency impact, and a 2 percent decline in volume. Portfolio remained flat. Local price & product mix gains are the result of broad-based actions taken in 2022 across all lines of business to offset cost inflation. Volume gains in Water Solutions are due to continued strong demand within Reverse Osmosis and Ultrafiltration and volume gains in Safety Solutions primarily within Kevlar, were more than offset by volume declines in construction markets impacting all businesses within Shelter Solutions.Operating EBITDA was $344 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, up 1 percent compared with $341 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022 driven by pricing gains which were mostly offset by higher raw material and energy costs, lower volumes and unfavorable currency impacts.
Corporate & Other includes sales and activity of the Auto Adhesives & Fluids, MultibaseTM and Tedlar® product lines, (the "Retained Businesses"). The results of Corporate & Other for the three months ended March 31, 2022 also includes the sales and activity of the Biomaterials business through its divestiture in May 2022. Corporate & Other also includes certain enterprise and governance activities including non-allocated corporate overhead costs and support functions, leveraged services, non-business aligned litigation expenses and other costs not absorbed by reportable segments. Related to the M&M Divestitures, Corporate & Other includes Future Reimbursable Indirect Costs.
Corporate & Other net sales were $273 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, down from $309 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Net sales primarily decreased due to the divestiture of the Biomaterials business, partially offset by an increase in the net sales of the Retained Businesses.
Information related to the Company's liquidity and capital resources can be found in the Company's 2022 Annual Report, Part II, Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Liquidity and Capital Resources. Discussion below provides the updates to this information for the three months ended March 31, 2023.The Company continually reviews its sources of liquidity and debt portfolio and may make adjustments to one or both to ensure adequate liquidity and increase the Company’s optionality and financing efficiency as it relates to financing cost and balancing terms/maturities. The Company’s primary source of incremental liquidity is cash flows from operating activities. Management expects the generation of cash from operations and the ability to access the debt capital markets and other sources of liquidity will continue to provide sufficient liquidity and financial flexibility to meet the Company’s and its subsidiaries' obligations as they come due. However, DuPont is unable to predict the extent of macroeconomic related impacts which depend on uncertain and unpredictable future developments. In light of this uncertainty, the Company has taken steps to further ensure liquidity and capital resources, as discussed below.
The Company's cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022 were $4.8 billion and $5.0 billion, respectively, of which $1.1 billion at March 31, 2023 and $1.2 billion at December 31, 2022 were held by subsidiaries in foreign countries, including United States territories. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents held by subsidiaries in foreign countries is due to operating cash flows during the period, partly offset by repatriation. For each of its foreign subsidiaries, the Company makes an assertion regarding the amount of earnings intended for permanent reinvestment, with the balance available to be repatriated to the United States. Total debt at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022 was approximately $8.1 billion. The slight increase was primarily due to the changes in the fair value of interest rate swaps designated as fair value hedges.As of March 31, 2023, the Company is contractually obligated to make future cash payments of $8.2 billion and $5.3 billion associated with principal and interest, respectively, on debt obligations. Related to the principal, $300 million will be due in the next twelve months, and the remainder will be due subsequent to March 31, 2024. Related to interest, $408 million will be due in the next twelve months, and the remainder will be due subsequent to March 31, 2024.
In April 2023, the Company's $1 billion 364-day revolving credit facility expired. The Company is in the process standing a new $1 billion 364-day revolving credit facility with an expected effective date in May 2023.
In April 2022, DuPont downsized its authorized commercial paper program from $3.0 billion to $2.5 billion (the “DuPont Commercial Paper Program”). At March 31, 2023 the Company had no commercial paper outstanding.
On May 2, 2023, the Company announced that it had entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Spectrum Plastics Group (“Spectrum”) from AEA Investors for $1.75 billion, $1.72 billion net purchase price after certain tax attributes (the “Proposed Spectrum Acquisition”). The Proposed Spectrum Acquisition is expected to close by the end of the third quarter of 2023, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing conditions, and will be part of the Electronic & Industrials segment. The Company intends to pay for the acquisition from existing cash balances.
The Company's credit ratings impact its access to the debt capital markets and cost of capital. The Company remains committed to maintaining a strong financial position with a balanced financial policy focused on maintaining a strong investment-grade rating and driving shareholder value and remuneration. At April 30, 2023, DuPont's credit ratings were as follows:
The Company's indenture covenants include customary limitations on liens, sale and leaseback transactions, and mergers and consolidations, subject to certain limitations. The senior unsecured notes (the "2018 Senior Notes") also contain customary default provisions. The Five-Year Revolving Credit Facility and the 2022 $1B Revolving Credit Facilities contain a financial covenant, typical for companies with similar credit ratings, requiring that the ratio of Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization for the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries not exceed 0.60. At March 31, 2023, the Company was in compliance with this financial covenant.
The Company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the interim Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, are summarized in the following table.
In the first three months of 2023, cash provided by operating activities was $343 million, compared with $209 million in the same period last year. The increase in cash provided by operating activities is primarily due to the release of cash from accounts and notes receivable, inventory and other assets and liabilities partially offset by lower net income and cash used by accounts payable.The table below reflects net working capital on a continuing operations basis:
1.Net working capital has been presented to exclude the assets and liabilities related to the Delrin Divestiture. The assets and liabilities related to the Delrin Divestiture are presented as assets of discontinued operations and liabilities of discontinued operations, respectively.
In the first three months of 2023, cash used for investing activities was $259 million, compared with cash used for investing activities of $229 million in the first three months of 2022. The increase in cash used for investing activities is primarily attributable to an increase in cash used in the purchases of investments and the absence of cash proceeds from the sale of businesses.
In the first three months of 2023, cash used for financing activities was $213 million compared with cash used for financing activities of $258 million in the same period last year. The decrease in cash used for financing activities is primarily attributable to the decrease in cash used for purchases common stock partially offset by the decrease in cash provided by short-term borrowings and proceeds from issuance of Company stock.
On February 6, 2023, the Board of Directors declared a first quarter 2023 dividend of $0.36 per share, paid on March 15, 2023, to shareholders of record on February 28, 2023.On April 19, 2023, the Company announced that its Board declared a second quarter dividend of $0.36 per share payable on June 15, 2023, to shareholders of record on May 31, 2023.
In November 2022, DuPont’s Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program authorizing the repurchase and retirement of up to $5 billion of common stock (the “$5B Share Buyback Program"). The $5B Share Buyback Program expires on June 30, 2024, unless extended or shortened by the Board of Directors. In the fourth quarter 2022, DuPont entered into accelerated share repurchase ("ASR") agreements with three financial counterparties. DuPont paid an aggregate of $3.25 billion to the counterparties and received initial deliveries of 38.8 million shares in aggregate of DuPont common stock, which were retired immediately and recorded as a reduction to retained earnings of $2.6 billion. The remaining $650 million was evaluated as an unsettled forward contract indexed to DuPont common stock, classified within stockholders’ equity. The final number of shares to be repurchased will be based on the volume-weighted average stock price for DuPont common stock during the term of the ASR transaction, less an agreed upon discount. The ASR transaction is being funded with cash on hand and is expected to be completed in the third quarter 2023.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, there were no purchases of the Company's common stock. At March 31, 2023, $2 billion is the approximate dollar value of shares that remain authorized for repurchases under the $5B Share Buyback Program repurchase authorization. Any additional repurchases under the $5B Share Buyback program will be made from time to time on the open market at prevailing market prices or in privately negotiated transactions off the market, which may include additional accelerated share repurchase agreements. The timing and number of shares to be repurchased will depend on factors such as the share price, economic and market conditions, and corporate and regulatory requirements.See Part II, Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds, for additional information.
DuPont expects to make additional contributions in the aggregate of approximately $55 million by year-end 2023 to pension and other post-employment benefit plans, including plans held in discontinued operations. Any such contribution could be funded by existing cash balances and/or cash from other available sources of liquidity.
In October 2022, the Company approved targeted restructuring actions to capture near-term cost reductions and to further simplify certain organizational structures following the M&M Divestitures (the "2022 Restructuring Program"). As a result in the fourth quarter 2022, the Company recorded pre-tax restructuring charges of $71 million inception to date, comprised of $68 million of severance and related benefit costs and $3 million of asset related charges. At March 31, 2023, total liabilities related to the 2022 Restructuring Program were $53 million for severance and related benefit costs, recognized in "Accrued and other current liabilities" in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.See Note 5 to the interim Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on the Company's restructuring programs.