
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q is a combined report being filed by Dow Inc. and The Dow Chemical Company and its consolidated subsidiaries (“TDCC” and together with Dow Inc., “Dow” or the "Company") due to the parent/subsidiary relationship between Dow Inc. and TDCC. The information reflected in the report is equally applicable to both Dow Inc. and TDCC, except where otherwise noted. Each of Dow Inc. and TDCC is filing information in this report on its own behalf and neither company makes any representation to the information relating to the other company.Pursuant to General Instruction H(1)(a) and (b) for Form 10-Q "Omission of Information by Certain Wholly-Owned Subsidiaries," TDCC is filing this Form 10-Q with a reduced disclosure format.Except as otherwise indicated by the context, the term "Union Carbide" means Union Carbide Corporation and the term "Dow Silicones" means Dow Silicones Corporation, both wholly owned subsidiaries of the Company.
Looking to the remainder of the year, Dow's consistent and disciplined execution enhances its ability to navigate the impact of higher inflation on consumer demand and soft global economic activity. Dow expects the benefit of its operational and cost actions to continue to build as it progresses through 2023. Dow will remain flexible, responding quickly as conditions evolve and expects oil and gas spreads to further support its strategic cost-advantaged positions. The underlying long-term growth fundamentals in Dow's market verticals remain intact as Dow advances both its decarbonize and grow and transform the waste strategies to raise its underlying earnings profile by $3 billion across the economic cycle.
The following is a summary of the results for the three months ended March 31, 2023:•The Company reported net sales in the first quarter of 2023 of $11.9 billion, down 22 percent from $15.3 billion in the first quarter of 2022, with decreases across all operating segments and geographic regions; Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 20 percent), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 25 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 25 percent).•Local price decreased 10 percent compared with the first quarter of 2022 with decreases across all operating segments; Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 11 percent), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 6 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 12 percent). Local price decreased in all geographic regions compared with the first quarter of 2022. •Volume decreased 11 percent compared with the first quarter of 2022. Volume decreased in all operating segments; Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 8 percent) Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 17 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 11 percent). Volume decreased in all geographic regions, except Latin America, which was flat. •Currency had an unfavorable impact of 1 percent on net sales compared with the first quarter of 2022, driven by EMEAI (down 3 percent) and Asia Pacific (down 3 percent).•Restructuring and asset related charges - net were $541 million in the first quarter of 2023, reflecting actions related to the 2023 Restructuring Program, which was approved by the Dow Inc. Board on January 25, 2023. The restructuring charges consisted of severance and related benefit costs of $344 million and asset write-downs and write-offs of $197 million.•Equity in losses of nonconsolidated affiliates was $48 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with equity in earnings of nonconsolidated affiliates of $174 million in the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to lower integrated polyethylene margins and lower demand at the Company's principal joint ventures.•Net income (loss) available for Dow Inc. and TDCC common stockholder(s) was a loss of $93 million and $100 million, respectively, in the first quarter of 2023, compared with income of $1,569 million and $1,561 million in the first quarter of 2022. Earnings (loss) per share for Dow Inc. was a loss per share of $0.13 in the first quarter of 2023, compared with earnings per share of $2.11 in the first quarter of 2022. These decreases reflect lower local prices and reduced operating rates to match market dynamics.•Cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations was $531 million in the first quarter of 2023, down $1.1 billion compared with the same period last year. Compared with the fourth quarter of 2022, cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations decreased $1.5 billion.•Dow Inc. repurchased $125 million of the Company's common stock in the first quarter of 2023.•On February 9, 2023, Dow Inc. announced that its Board of Directors ("Board") declared a dividend of $0.70 per share, which was paid on March 10, 2023, to shareholders of record as of February 28, 2023.In addition, the following events occurred subsequent to the first quarter of 2023:•On April 13, 2023, Dow Inc. announced that its Board declared a dividend of $0.70 per share, payable on June 9, 2023, to shareholders of record as of May 31, 2023.
The following tables summarize net sales and sales variances by operating segment and geographic region from the prior year:
Net sales in the first quarter of 2023 were $11.9 billion, down 22 percent from $15.3 billion in the first quarter of 2022, with local price down 10 percent, volume down 11 percent and an unfavorable currency impact of 1 percent. Net sales decreased in all operating segments and geographic regions, primarily driven by slower economic growth. Local price decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 11 percent), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 6 percent), and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 12 percent), driven by industry supply additions. Volume decreased in all operating segments and geographic regions except Latin America, which was flat. Volume decreased in Packaging & Specialty Plastics (down 8 percent), Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure (down 17 percent) and Performance Materials & Coatings (down 11 percent). Currency unfavorably impacted net sales by 1 percent, driven by EMEAI (down 3 percent) and Asia Pacific (down 3 percent). Excluding the Hydrocarbons & Energy business, net sales decreased 22 percent.
Cost of sales ("COS") was $10.6 billion in the first quarter of 2023, down from $12.4 billion in the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to lower raw material costs on lower volume. COS as a percentage of net sales was 89.7 percent in the first quarter of 2023 compared with 81.2 percent in the first quarter of 2022.
Research and development ("R&D") expenses totaled $214 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with $218 million in the first quarter of 2022.
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses totaled $428 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with $498 million in the first quarter of 2022. SG&A expenses decreased in the first quarter of 2023 due to lower performance-based compensation costs and bad debt reserve write-offs more than offsetting increases in labor costs as well as fringe benefit expenses tied to stock market changes.
Amortization of intangibles was $81 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with $88 million in the first quarter of 2022.
On January 25, 2023, the Dow Inc. Board approved restructuring actions to achieve the Company's structural cost improvement initiatives in response to the continued economic impact from the global recessionary environment and to enhance its agility and long-term competitiveness across the economic cycle. As a result of these actions, in the first quarter of 2023 the Company recorded pretax restructuring charges of $541 million, consisting of severance and related benefit costs of $344 million and asset write-downs and write-offs of $197 million. Restructuring charges by segment were as follows: $1 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $40 million in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, $49 million in Performance Materials & Coatings and $451 million in Corporate. These actions are expected to be substantially complete by the end of 2024.
In the first quarter of 2022, the Company recorded pretax asset related charges of $186 million due to the Russia and Ukraine conflict and the expectation that certain assets will not be recoverable. These charges included the write-down of inventory, the recording of bad debt reserves and the impairment of other assets. Asset related charges by segment were as follows: $31 million in Packaging & Specialty Plastics, $109 million in Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure, $16 million in Performance Materials & Coatings and $30 million in Corporate.
The Company's share of equity in losses of nonconsolidated affiliates was $48 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with equity in earnings of nonconsolidated affiliates of $174 million in the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to lower integrated polyethylene margins and lower demand at the Company's principal joint ventures. Dividends from nonconsolidated affiliates were $53 million in the first three months of 2023, compared with $548 million in the first three months of 2022.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, Sundry income (expense) - net was income of $79 million and $69 million for Dow Inc. and TDCC, respectively, compared with income of $148 million and $136 million, respectively, for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The first quarter of 2023 included non-operating pension and postretirement benefit plan credits and gains on the sales of assets and investments. These were partially offset by foreign currency exchange losses. In addition, Dow Inc. included a $9 million gain associated with agreements entered into with DuPont de Nemours, Inc. ("DuPont") and Corteva, Inc. ("Corteva") as part of the separation and distribution (related to Corporate).
Interest expense and amortization of debt discount was $185 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with $167 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in interest expense is primarily due to higher interest rates in 2023.
The Company's effective tax rate fluctuates based on, among other factors, where income is earned, the level of income relative to tax attributes and the level of equity earnings, since most earnings from the Company's equity method investments are taxed at the joint venture level. The Company reported a credit for income taxes of $47 million in the first quarter of 2023, resulting in an effective tax rate of 39.2 percent and 37.0 percent for Dow Inc. and TDCC, respectively, compared with a provision of $503 million in the first quarter of 2022, resulting in an effective tax rate of 24.5 percent and 24.6 percent. The credit for income taxes in 2023 was primarily due to negative pretax income and benefits related to deferred tax assets in a foreign jurisdiction, partially offset by a remeasurement of uncertain tax positions. These factors in conjunction with geographic mix of earnings resulted in a higher tax rate for the first quarter of 2023 compared with the first quarter of 2022.
Net income (loss) available for Dow Inc. common stockholders was a loss of $93 million, or $0.13 per share, in the first quarter of 2023, compared with income of $1,569 million, or $2.11 per share, in the first quarter of 2022. See Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details on Dow Inc.'s earnings (loss) per share calculations.
Net income (loss) available for the TDCC common stockholder was a loss of $100 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with income of $1,561 million in the first quarter of 2022. TDCC's common shares are owned solely by Dow Inc.
For further discussion of the Company's segments, see Part I, Item 1. Business of the combined Dow Inc. and TDCC Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022 ("2022 10-K"), filed with the SEC on February 1, 2023.Dow’s measure of profit/loss for segment reporting purposes is Operating EBIT as this is the manner in which the Company's chief operating decision maker assesses performance and allocates resources. The Company defines Operating EBIT as earnings (i.e., "Income (loss) before income taxes") before interest, excluding the impact of significant items. Operating EBIT by segment includes all operating items relating to the businesses; items that principally apply to Dow as a whole are assigned to Corporate.
Packaging & Specialty Plastics net sales were $6,114 million in the first quarter of 2023, down 20 percent from net sales of $7,627 million in the first quarter of 2022, with local price down 11 percent, volume down 8 percent and an unfavorable currency impact of 1 percent. Local price decreased in both businesses and across all geographic regions. Local price, primarily in the U.S. & Canada and EMEAI, decreased in Hydrocarbons & Energy as prices for co-products are generally correlated to Brent crude oil prices, which, on average, decreased 15 percent compared with the first quarter of 2022. Local price decreased in Packaging and Specialty Plastics in all geographic regions, driven by lower polyethylene prices, which were partially offset by gains in functional polymers. Volume decreased in Hydrocarbons & Energy, driven by lower olefins and aromatics sales primarily in EMEAI. Volume decreased in Packaging and Specialty Plastics primarily due to lower demand in all geographic regions except for Latin America. Operating EBIT was $642 million in the first quarter of 2023, down $592 million from Operating EBIT of $1,234 million in the first quarter of 2022. Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to lower selling prices and demand and lower equity earnings, which were partially offset by lower raw materials and energy costs driven by lower volume.
Industrial Intermediates & Infrastructure net sales were $3,378 million in the first quarter of 2023, down 25 percent from $4,524 million in the first quarter of 2022, with local price down 6 percent, volume down 17 percent, and an unfavorable currency impact of 2 percent. Local price decreased in both businesses and across all geographic regions. Currency had an unfavorable impact on sales in both businesses, driven by EMEAI and Asia Pacific. Volume decreased in both businesses and across all geographic regions.  Volume decreased in Polyurethanes & Construction Chemicals, driven by lower demand for building & construction, consumer durables, and industrial applications. Volume decreased in Industrial Solutions, driven by lower demand for coatings and industrial applications.Operating EBIT was $123 million in the first quarter of 2023, down $538 million from Operating EBIT of $661 million in the first quarter of 2022. Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to lower selling prices and demand, margin compression due to rising energy costs particularly in EMEAI and lower equity earnings at the EQUATE and Sadara joint ventures.
Performance Materials & Coatings net sales were $2,276 million in the first quarter of 2023, down 25 percent from net sales of $3,049 million in the first quarter of 2022, with local price down 12 percent, volume down 11 percent and an unfavorable currency impact of 2 percent. Local price decreased in both businesses and across all geographic regions. Consumer Solutions local price decreased primarily due to competitive pricing pressure from supply additions in China in upstream siloxanes. Local price decreased in Coatings & Performance Monomers primarily due to lower raw material prices and unfavorable supply and demand dynamics in acrylic monomers and architectural coatings. Volume decreased in Consumer Solutions in EMEAI, the U.S. & Canada and Latin America, partially offset by an increase in Asia Pacific. Volume decreased in Coatings & Performance Monomers in all regions, driven by lower demand for architectural coatings. The unfavorable currency impact was driven by EMEAI and Asia Pacific. Operating EBIT was $35 million in the first quarter of 2023, down $560 million from Operating EBIT of $595 million in the first quarter of 2022. Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to price decreases in Consumer Solutions and lower demand in both businesses.
Net sales for Corporate, which primarily relate to the Company's insurance operations, were $83 million in the first quarter of 2023, an increase from net sales of $64 million in the first quarter of 2022. Operating EBIT was a loss of $92 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared with a loss of $71 million in the first quarter of 2022. Operating EBIT decreased primarily due to increased costs.
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $3,319 million at March 31, 2023 and $3,886 million at December 31, 2022, of which $1,610 million at March 31, 2023 and $1,789 million at December 31, 2022 was held by subsidiaries in foreign countries, including U.S. territories. For each of its foreign subsidiaries, Dow makes an assertion regarding the amount of earnings intended for permanent reinvestment, with the balance available to be repatriated to the United States.Cash held by foreign subsidiaries for permanent reinvestment is generally used to finance the subsidiaries' operational activities and future foreign investments. Dow has the ability to repatriate additional funds to the United States, which could result in an adjustment to the tax liability for foreign withholding taxes, foreign and/or U.S. state income taxes and the impact of foreign currency movements. At March 31, 2023, management believed that sufficient liquidity was available in the United States. The Company has and expects to continue repatriating certain funds from its non‑U.S. subsidiaries that are not needed to finance local operations; however, these particular repatriation activities have not and are not expected to result in a significant incremental tax liability to the Company.The Company's cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized in the following table:
Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations in the first three months of 2023 was primarily driven by the Company's cash earnings, which were partially offset by cash used for working capital requirements and performance-based compensation payments. Cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations in the first three months of 2022 was primarily driven by the Company's cash earnings and dividends from equity method investments, which were partially offset by cash used for working capital requirements and performance-based compensation payments.
Cash provided by (used for) operating activities from discontinued operations in the first three months of 2023 and 2022 was related to cash payments and receipts Dow Inc. had with DuPont and Corteva that related to certain agreements and matters related to the separation from DowDuPont Inc. ("DowDuPont").
Cash used for investing activities in the first three months of 2023 and 2022 were primarily for capital expenditures and purchases of investments, which were partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of investments.The Company's capital expenditures were $440 million in the first three months of 2023, compared with $315 million in the first three months of 2022. The Company expects full year capital spending in 2023 to be approximately $2.2 billion. The Company will adjust its spending through the year as economic conditions evolve.
Cash used for financing activities in the first three months of 2023 was primarily for debt related activities, partially offset by proceeds from issuance of common stock. In addition, Dow Inc. included cash outflows for dividends paid to stockholders and purchases of treasury stock. TDCC included cash outflows for dividends paid to Dow Inc. Cash used for financing activities in the first three months of 2022 included debt related activity, partially offset by collections related to securitization programs and proceeds from issuance of common stock. In addition, Dow Inc. included cash outflows for dividends paid to stockholders and purchases of treasury stock. TDCC included cash outflows for dividends paid to Dow Inc.
Dow defines Free Cash Flow as "Cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations," less capital expenditures. Under this definition, Free Cash Flow represents the cash generated by Dow from operations after investing in its asset base. Free Cash Flow, combined with cash balances and other sources of liquidity, represents the cash available to fund obligations and provide returns to shareholders. Free Cash Flow is an integral financial measure used in the Company's financial planning process.
Dow defines Operating EBITDA as earnings (i.e., "Income (loss) before income taxes") before interest, depreciation and amortization, excluding the impact of significant items.
Dow defines Cash Flow Conversion (Operating EBITDA to Cash Flow from Operations) as "Cash provided by operating activities - continuing operations," divided by Operating EBITDA. Management believes Cash Flow Conversion is an important financial metric as it helps the Company determine how efficiently it is converting its earnings into cash flow.These financial measures are not recognized in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) and should not be viewed as alternatives to GAAP financial measures of performance. All companies do not calculate non-GAAP financial measures in the same manner and, accordingly, Dow's definitions may not be consistent with the methodologies used by other companies.
1.The three months ended March 31, 2023 includes restructuring charges and implementation and efficiency costs associated with the Company's 2023 Restructuring Program, certain gains and losses associated with previously impaired equity investments, a loss associated with legacy agricultural products groundwater contamination matters and activity related to the separation from DowDuPont. The three months ended March 31, 2022 includes costs associated with implementing the Company's Digital Acceleration program and 2020 Restructuring Program, asset related charges due to the Russia and Ukraine conflict and activity related to the separation from DowDuPont. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
The Company’s primary source of incremental liquidity is cash flows from operating activities. The generation of cash from operations and the Company's ability to access capital markets is expected to meet the Company’s cash requirements for working capital, capital expenditures, debt maturities, contributions to pension plans, dividend distributions to stockholders, share repurchases and other needs. In addition to cash from operating activities, the Company’s current liquidity sources also include TDCC's U.S. and Euromarket commercial paper programs, committed and uncommitted credit facilities, committed accounts receivable facilities, a medium-term notes program, a U.S. retail note program (“InterNotes®”) and other debt markets.The Company continues to maintain a strong financial position with all of its committed credit facilities undrawn and fully available at March 31, 2023. Cash and committed and available forms of liquidity were $13.2 billion at March 31, 2023. The Company also has no substantive long-term debt maturities due until 2027. As a well-known seasoned issuer the Company may issue debt at any time as an additional source of liquidity. Additional details on sources of liquidity are as follows:
TDCC issues promissory notes under its U.S. and Euromarket commercial paper programs. TDCC had $200 million of commercial paper outstanding at March 31, 2023. TDCC maintains access to the commercial paper market at competitive rates. Amounts outstanding under TDCC's commercial paper programs during the period may be greater, or less than, the amount reported at the end of the period. TDCC did not issue commercial paper subsequent to March 31, 2023.
The Company also has the ability to access liquidity through TDCC's committed and available credit facilities. At March 31, 2023, TDCC had total committed and available credit facilities of $8.4 billion.
The Company has entered into various uncommitted bilateral credit arrangements as a potential source of excess liquidity. These lines can be used to support short-term liquidity needs and for general purposes, including letters of credit. The Company had no drawdowns outstanding at March 31, 2023.
In addition to the above committed credit facilities, the Company maintains a committed accounts receivable facility in the U.S. where eligible trade accounts receivable, up to $900 million, may be sold at any point in time. The Company also maintains a committed accounts receivable facility in Europe where eligible trade accounts receivable, up to €500 million, may be sold at any point in time. In the first quarter of 2023, the Company sold no receivables under the U.S. and Europe committed accounts receivable facilities ($250 million in the first three months of 2022).
The Company has investments in company-owned life insurance ("COLI") policies, which are recorded at their cash surrender value as of each balance sheet date. The Company has the ability to monetize its investment in its COLI policies as an additional source of liquidity. The Company had no outstanding monetization of its existing COLI policies' surrender value at March 31, 2023.
As the Company continues to maintain its strong balance sheet and financial flexibility, management is focused on net debt (a non-GAAP financial measure), as the Company believes this is the best representation of its financial leverage at this point in time. As shown in the following table, net debt is equal to total gross debt minus "Cash and cash equivalents" and "Marketable securities."
1.Included in "Other current assets" in the consolidated balance sheets.The Company may at any time repurchase certain debt securities in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions subject to: the applicable terms under which any such debt securities were issued, certain internal approvals of the Company, and applicable laws and regulations of the relevant jurisdiction in which any such potential transactions might take place. This in no way obligates the Company to make any such repurchases nor should it be considered an offer to do so.TDCC's public debt instruments and primary, private credit agreements contain, among other provisions, certain customary restrictive covenant and default provisions. TDCC's most significant debt covenant with regard to its financial position is the obligation to maintain the ratio of its consolidated indebtedness to consolidated capitalization at no greater than 0.70 to 1.00 at any time the aggregate outstanding amount of loans under the Five Year Competitive Advance and Revolving Credit Facility Agreement ("Revolving Credit Agreement") equals or exceeds $500 million. The ratio of TDCC's consolidated indebtedness to consolidated capitalization as defined in the Revolving Credit Agreement was 0.40 to 1.00 at March 31, 2023. Management believes TDCC was in compliance with all of its covenants and default provisions at March 31, 2023. For information on TDCC's debt covenants and default provisions, see Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 10-K. There were no material changes to the debt covenants and default provisions related to TDCC’s outstanding long-term debt and primary, private credit agreements in the first three months of 2023.While taking into consideration the current economic environment, management expects that the Company will continue to have sufficient liquidity and financial flexibility to meet all of its business obligations.
At March 31, 2023, TDCC's credit ratings were as follows:
Dow Inc. has paid dividends on a quarterly basis since the separation from DowDuPont and expects to continue to do so, subject to approval by the Dow Inc. Board. Dividends declared by the Board align to the Company's strategy announced in 2018 of returning approximately 45 percent of Operating Net Income to shareholders through dividends and total shareholder remuneration of approximately 65 percent, when including share repurchases, over the economic cycle. The Company defines Operating Net Income, a non-GAAP measure, as "Net income (loss) available for Dow Inc. common stockholders," excluding the impact of significant items. The following table summarizes dividends declared and paid to common stockholders of record in 2023:
TDCC has committed to fund Dow Inc.'s dividends paid to common stockholders and share repurchases, as approved by the Dow Inc. Board, as well as certain governance expenses. Funding is accomplished through intercompany loans. TDCC's Board reviews and determines a dividend distribution to Dow Inc. to settle the intercompany loans. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, TDCC declared and paid a dividend to Dow Inc. of $620 million ($1,121 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022). At March 31, 2023, TDCC's intercompany loan balance with Dow Inc. was insignificant.
On April 13, 2022, the Dow Inc. Board approved a share repurchase program authorizing up to $3 billion for the repurchase of the Company's common stock, with no expiration date. The Company repurchased $125 million of its common stock in the first quarter of 2023. At March 31, 2023, approximately $1,925 million of the new share repurchase program authorization remained available for repurchases. As previously announced, the Company intends to repurchase shares to cover dilution over the cycle. The Company may from time to time expand its share repurchases beyond dilution, based on a number of factors including macroeconomic conditions, free cash flow generation, and the Dow share price. Any share repurchases, when coupled with the Company's dividends, are intended to implement the long-term strategy of targeting shareholder remuneration of approximately 65 percent over the economic cycle.
The Company has both funded and unfunded defined benefit pension plans that cover employees in the United States and a number of other countries. The Company's funding policy is to contribute to funded plans when pension laws and/or economics either require or encourage funding. See Note 12 to the Consolidated Financial Statements and Note 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 10-K for additional information related to the Company's pension plans.
The actions related to the 2023 Restructuring Program are expected to result in additional cash expenditures of $333 million, primarily through 2024 and consist primarily of severance and related benefit costs. Restructuring implementation costs, primarily decommissioning and demolition activities related to asset actions, and costs associated with the Company's productivity and efficiency actions, are expected to result in additional cash expenditures of approximately $425 million, primarily through the end of 2024. Restructuring implementation and efficiency costs totaled $40 million in the first quarter of 2023.The Company expects to incur additional costs in the future related to its restructuring activities, which will be recognized as incurred. The Company also expects to incur additional employee-related costs, including involuntary termination benefits related to its other optimization activities. These costs cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. See Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the Company's restructuring activities.
Information related to the Company’s contractual obligations, commercial commitments and expected cash requirements for interest can be found in Notes 14, 15, 16 and 19 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 10-K. With the exception of the items noted below, there have been no material changes in the Company’s contractual obligations since December 31, 2022.
1.Excludes unamortized debt discount and issuance costs of $277 million. Includes finance lease obligations of $787 million.2.Cash requirements for interest on long-term debt was calculated using current interest rates at March 31, 2023, and includes $6 million of various floating rate notes.
See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information concerning fair value measurements.
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. The Company’s critical accounting policies that are impacted by judgments, assumptions and estimates are described in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in the 2022 10-K. Since December 31, 2022, there have been no material changes in the Company’s accounting policies that are impacted by judgments, assumptions and estimates.
Union Carbide is and has been involved in a large number of asbestos-related suits filed primarily in state courts during the past four decades. These suits principally allege personal injury resulting from exposure to asbestos‑containing products and frequently seek both actual and punitive damages. The alleged claims primarily relate to products that Union Carbide sold in the past, alleged exposure to asbestos-containing products located on Union Carbide’s premises, and Union Carbide’s responsibility for asbestos suits filed against a former Union Carbide subsidiary, Amchem Products, Inc. (“Amchem”). In many cases, plaintiffs are unable to demonstrate that they have suffered any compensable loss as a result of such exposure, or that injuries incurred in fact resulted from exposure to Union Carbide’s products.The table below provides information regarding asbestos-related claims pending against Union Carbide and Amchem based on criteria developed by Union Carbide and its external consultants:
Plaintiffs’ lawyers often sue numerous defendants in individual lawsuits or on behalf of numerous claimants. As a result, the damages alleged are not expressly identified as to Union Carbide, Amchem or any other particular defendant, even when specific damages are alleged with respect to a specific disease or injury. In fact, there are no personal injury cases in which only Union Carbide and/or Amchem are the sole named defendants. For these reasons and based upon Union Carbide’s litigation and settlement experience, Union Carbide does not consider the damages alleged against Union Carbide and Amchem to be a meaningful factor in its determination of any potential asbestos-related liability.For additional information, see Asbestos-Related Matters of Union Carbide Corporation in Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements; Part II, Item 1. Legal Proceedings; and Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 10-K.