
The following management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) provides information we believe is useful in understanding our operating results, cash flows and financial condition. We provide quantitative information about the material sales drivers including the impact of changes in volume and pricing and the effect of acquisitions and changes in foreign currency at the corporate and reportable segment level. We also provide quantitative information regarding special (gains) and charges, discrete tax items and other significant factors we believe are useful for understanding our results. Such quantitative drivers are supported by comments meant to be qualitative in nature. Qualitative factors are generally ordered based on estimated significance.The MD&A should be read in conjunction with both the unaudited consolidated financial information and related notes included in this Form 10-Q, and Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. This discussion contains various Non-GAAP Financial Measures and also contains various Forward-Looking Statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We refer readers to the statements entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and “Forward-Looking Statements” located at the end of Part I of this report.
Our non-GAAP financial measures for organic sales, organic operating income and organic operating income margin are at fixed currency and exclude the impact of special (gains) and charges, the results of our acquired businesses from the first twelve months post acquisition and the results of divested businesses from the twelve months prior to divestiture. As part of the separation of ChampionX in 2020, we entered into a Master Cross Supply and Product Transfer agreement with ChampionX to provide, receive or transfer certain products for a period of 36 months and for a small set of products with limited suppliers over the next few years. Sales of product to ChampionX under this agreement are recorded in product and equipment sales in the Corporate segment along with the related cost of sales. These transactions are removed from the consolidated results as part of the calculation of the impact of acquisitions and divestitures.
Effective January 1, 2023, our former Downstream operating segment is now part of the Water operating segment. This change did not have any impact on the Global Industrial reportable segment.
Management evaluates the sales and operating income performance of our non-U.S. dollar functional currency international operations based on fixed currency exchange rates, which eliminate the impact of exchange rate fluctuations on our international operations. Fixed currency amounts are updated annually at the beginning of each year based on translation into U.S. dollars at foreign currency exchange rates established by management, with all periods presented using such rates. Public currency rate data provided within the “Segment Performance” section of this MD&A reflect amounts translated at actual public average rates of exchange prevailing during the corresponding period and is provided for informational purposes only.
When comparing first quarter 2023 against first quarter 2022, sales performance was as follows:●Reported net sales increased 9% to $3,571.6 million and organic sales increased 13%. ●Organic sales for our Global Industrial segment increased 12% to $1,699.3 million, led by double-digit growth in Water and Food & Beverage.●Organic sales for our Global Institutional & Specialty segment increased 14% to $1,126.6 million with double-digit growth in both Institutional and Specialty. ●Organic sales for our Global Healthcare & Life Sciences segment increased 9% to $378.6 million driven by double-digit growth in Life Sciences and strong Healthcare sales growth. ●Organic sales for Other increased 15% to $329.3 million reflecting double-digit growth in Pest Elimination, Textile Care and Colloidal Technologies.
When comparing first quarter 2023 against first quarter 2022, our financial performance was as follows:●Reported operating income increased 38% to $351.6 million. Excluding the impact of special (gains) and charges from both 2023 and 2022 reported results, adjusted operating income increased 14%. ●Net income attributable to Ecolab increased 36% to $233.4 million. Excluding the impact of special (gains) and charges and discrete tax items from both 2023 and 2022 reported results, our adjusted net income attributable to Ecolab increased 6%.●Reported diluted EPS increased 37% to $0.82. Excluding the impact of special (gains) and charges and discrete tax items from both 2023 and 2022 reported results, adjusted diluted EPS increased 7% to $0.88 in the first quarter of 2023. ●Our reported tax rate was 18.0% during the first quarter of 2023, compared to 20.7% during the first quarter of 2022. Excluding the tax rate impact of special (gains) and charges and discrete tax items from both 2023 and 2022 results, our adjusted tax rate was 19.8% during the first quarter of 2023, compared to 19.5% during the first quarter of 2022.
Product and sold equipment revenue is generated from providing cleaning, sanitizing and water treatment products or selling equipment used in combination with specialized products. Service and lease equipment revenue is generated from providing services or leasing equipment to customers. All of our sales are subject to the same economic conditions.The percentage components of the period-over-period 2023 sales change are shown below:
Amounts do not necessarily sum due to rounding.
Our COS and corresponding gross profit margin (“gross margin”) are shown in the table above. Gross margin is defined as net sales less cost of sales divided by net sales.
Our reported gross margin was 38.3% and 36.5% for the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Special (gains) and charges included in items impacting cost of sales are shown within the “Special (Gains) and Charges” table below. Excluding the impact of special (gains) and charges within COS, first quarter 2023 and 2022 adjusted gross margin was 38.3% and 38.1%, respectively. Our adjusted gross margin increased when comparing the first quarter of 2023 against the first quarter of 2022, as strong pricing overcame continued significant increases in delivered product costs and unfavorable mix​.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses as a percentage of sales were 27.7% for the first quarter of 2023 compared to 28.0% for the first quarter of 2022. The SG&A ratio to sales in the first quarter of 2023 improved driven by increased productivity that more than offset investments in the business.
Special (gains) and charges reported on the Consolidated Statements of Income include the following items:
For segment reporting purposes, special (gains) and charges are not allocated to reportable segments, which is consistent with our internal management reporting.
Restructuring activities are primarily related to the Combined Program, Institutional Advancement Program, Accelerate 2020 and other immaterial restructuring programs which are described below. These activities have been included as a component of cost of sales and special (gains) and charges on the Consolidated Statements of Income. Restructuring liabilities have been classified as a component of other current and other noncurrent liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Further details related to our restructuring charges are included in Note 2.
In November 2022 we approved a Europe cost savings program. In connection with these actions, we expected to incur pre-tax charges of $130 million ($110 million after tax) or $0.38 per diluted share. In February 2023, we expanded our previously announced Europe cost savings program to focus on its Institutional and Healthcare businesses in other regions. In connection with the expanded program (“Combined Program”), we now expect to incur total pre-tax charges of $195 million ($150 million after tax) or $0.52 per diluted share. We expect that these restructuring charges will be completed by 2024. Program actions include headcount reductions from terminations, not filling certain open positions, and facility closures. The Combined Program charges are expected to be primarily cash expenditures related to severance and asset disposals.In anticipation of this Combined Program, a limited number of actions were taken in the fourth quarter of 2022. As a result, we reclassified $19.3 million ($14.5 million after tax) or $0.05 per diluted share from other restructuring to the Combined Program in the first quarter of 2023.
​During the first quarter of 2023 we recorded total restructuring charges of $13.4 million ($10.2 million after tax) or $0.04 per diluted share, primarily related to severance. The net liability related to the Combined Program was $56.3 million and $62.0 million as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The remaining liability is expected to be paid over a period of a few months to several quarters and will continue to be funded from operating activities. ​The Combined Program has delivered $35 million of cumulative cost savings with estimated annual cost savings of $175 million in continuing operations by 2024. ​Institutional Advancement Program​We approved a restructuring plan in 2020 focused on the Institutional business (“the Institutional Plan”) which is intended to enhance our Institutional sales and service structure and allow the sales team to capture share and penetration while maximizing service effectiveness by leveraging our ongoing investments in digital technology. In February 2021, we expanded the Institutional Plan, and we expect that these restructuring charges will be completed in 2023, with total anticipated costs of $70 million ($55 million after tax) or $0.19 per diluted share. The remaining costs are expected to be primarily non-cash charges related to equipment disposals. Actual costs may vary from these estimates depending on actions taken.​In the first quarter of 2023, we recorded restructuring charges of $2.4 million ($1.8 million after tax) or less than $0.01 per diluted share, primarily related to disposals of equipment. We have recorded $56.5 million ($43.2 million after tax), or $0.15 per diluted share of cumulative restructuring charges under the Institutional Plan. Net cash payments were $2.4 million and non-cash net charges were $1.7 million for the first quarter of 2023. The liability related to the Institutional Plan was $0.2 million as of March 31, 2023. ​The Institutional Plan has delivered $50 million of cumulative cost savings. ​Accelerate 2020​During 2018, we formally commenced a restructuring plan Accelerate 2020 (“the A2020 Plan”), to leverage technology and system investments and organizational changes. The goals of the Plan were to further simplify and automate processes and tasks, reduce complexity and management layers, consolidate facilities and focus on key long-term growth areas by further leveraging technology and structural improvements. The restructuring activities were completed at the end of 2022, with total costs of $254 million ($198 million after tax), or $0.69 per diluted share.​Net cash payments were $4.1 million for the first quarter of 2023. The liability related to the Plan was $14.0 million as of the end of the first quarter of 2023. The remaining liability is expected to be paid over a period of a few months to several quarters which continue to be funded from operating activities. ​The A2020 Plan has delivered $315 million of cumulative cost savings.​Other Restructuring Activities​During the first quarter of 2022, we incurred restructuring charges of $1.7 million ($1.3 million after tax), or $0.01 per diluted share related to other immaterial restructuring activity. ​The restructuring liability balance for all other restructuring plans excluding the Combined Program, the A2020 Plan and the Institutional Plan were $3.7 million and $23.2 million as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The decrease in liability was driven primarily by the reclass of $19.3 million from other restructuring to the Combined Program in the first quarter of 2023. Cash payments during the first quarter of 2023 related to all other restructuring plans excluding the Combined Program, the A2020 Plan and the Institutional Plan were $0.2 million.​Acquisition and integration related costs​Acquisition and integration costs reported in product and equipment cost of sales on the Consolidated Statements of Income in the first quarter of 2022 include $27.6 million ($21.4 million after tax) or $0.07 per diluted share and are primarily related to the recognition of fair value step-up in the Purolite inventory.​Acquisition and integration related costs reported in special (gains) and charges on the Consolidated Statements of Income include $5.0 million ($3.7 million after tax) or $0.01 per diluted share, and $7.5 million ($5.5 million after tax) or $0.02 per diluted share during the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Charges are integration related costs primarily related to the Purolite acquisition. ​​32
In light of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the sanctions against Russia by the United States and other countries, we have made the determination that we will limit our Russian business to operations that are essential to life, providing minimal support for our healthcare, life sciences, food and beverage and certain water businesses. We incurred charges of $0.3 million ($0.3 million after tax) or less than $0.01 per diluted share and charges of $18.0 million ($19.0 million after tax) or $0.07 per diluted share in the first quarter an of 2023 and 2022, respectively, primarily related to recoverability risk of certain assets in both Russia and Ukraine.
Other special charges recorded in the first quarter of 2023 and 2022 in product and equipment cost of sales and special (gains) and charges on the Consolidated Statements of Income were $6.6 million ($5.1 million after tax) or $0.02 per diluted share and $20.5 million ($15.3 million after tax) or $0.05 per diluted share, respectively, primarily related to certain legal charges and 2022 COVID-19 related inventory charges.
Our operating income and corresponding operating income margin are shown in the previous tables. Operating income margin is defined as operating income divided by net sales.Our reported operating income increased 38% in the first quarter of 2023 versus the comparable period of 2022. Our reported operating income for 2023 and 2022 was impacted by special (gains) and charges; excluding the impact of special (gains) and charges from 2023 and 2022 reported results, our adjusted operating income increased 14% in the first quarter of 2023.As shown in the previous table, foreign currency had a 5 percentage point impact on adjusted operating income growth for the first quarter of 2023. Foreign currency had a 3 percentage points impact on adjusted operating income growth for the first quarter of 2022.
Other income decreased to $13.1 million from $18.8 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, respectively, driven by higher pension costs.
Reported net interest expense was $74.2 million and $53.0 million in the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase in interest expense reflected the impact from higher average interest rates on floating rate debt and the 2022 fourth quarter debt issuance.
The following table provides a summary of our tax rate:
Our reported tax rate was 18.0% and 20.7% for the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively. The change in our tax rate for the first quarter of 2023 versus the comparable period of 2022 was driven primarily by discrete tax items and special (gains) and charges. The change in our tax rate includes the tax impact of special (gains) and charges and discrete tax items, which have impacted the comparability of our historical reported tax rates, as amounts included in our special (gains) and charges are derived from tax jurisdictions with rates that vary from our tax rate, and discrete tax items are not necessarily consistent across periods. The tax impact of special (gains) and charges and discrete tax items will likely continue to impact comparability of our reported tax rate in the future.We recognized net tax benefits related to discrete tax items of $4.0 million in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to changes in  uncertain tax positions, prior year return adjustments, repricing of deferred tax balances, and other changes in estimates.We recognized net tax expenses related to discrete tax items of $1.0 million in the first quarter of 2022. This included share-based compensation excess tax benefits of $2.9 million. Additionally, we recognized discrete tax expense of $3.9 million primarily due to audit settlements, changes in uncertain tax positions, prior year return adjustments, repricing of deferred tax balances, and other changes in estimates.
Per share amounts in the above tables do not necessary sum due to rounding.Currency translation had an unfavorable impact of approximately ($0.05) per share on diluted EPS for the first quarter of 2023, when compared to the comparable period of 2022.
The non-U.S. dollar functional international amounts included within our reportable segments are based on translation into U.S. dollars at the fixed currency exchange rates used by management for 2023. The difference between the fixed currency exchange rates and the actual currency exchange rates is reported as “effect of foreign currency translation” in the following tables. All other accounting policies of the reportable segments are consistent with U.S. GAAP and the accounting policies described in Note 2 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. Additional information about our reportable segments is included in Note 15.Fixed currency net sales and operating income for the first quarter of 2023 and 2022 for our reportable segments are shown in the following tables:
The following tables reconcile the impact of acquisitions and divestitures within our reportable segments:
Unless otherwise noted, the following segment performance commentary compares the first quarter of 2023 against the first quarter of 2022.
Percentages in the above table do not necessarily sum due to rounding.
Organic sales for Global Industrial increased in the first quarter of 2023, led by double-digit growth in Water and Food & Beverage.Water organic sales increased 14% in the first quarter of 2023, driven by strong pricing and new business wins. Light industry water treatment sales reported double-digit sales growth driven by very strong performance across data centers, microelectronics, and food & beverage. Heavy industry recorded double-digit sales growth across power, primary metals and chemicals​. Downstream industry reported strong sales growth led by strong water treatment program sales. Food ​& Beverage organic sales increased 14% in the first quarter of 2023 reflecting strong pricing and new business wins. Paper organic sales increased 6% in the first quarter of 2023 driven by solid sales growth as strong pricing and new business wins more than offset continued easing in customer production levels. ​
Organic operating income and organic operating income margins increased for Global Industrial in the first quarter of 2023.Organic operating income margins increased 0.8 percentage points during the first quarter of 2023, as the 11.5 percentage point positive impacts of strong pricing overcame the 11.2 percentage point negative impacts of higher delivered product costs, lower volume and investments in the business.
Percentages in the above table do not necessarily sum due to rounding.
Organic sales for Global Institutional & Specialty increased in the first quarter of 2023, with double-digit growth in both the Institutional and Specialty divisions. At an operating segment level, Institutional organic sales increased 14% in the first quarter of 2023 driven by pricing and new business wins. Specialty organic sales increased 12% in the first quarter of 2023 driven by strong quick service sales, which more than offset softer food retail sales​.
Organic operating income and organic operating income margin increased in the first quarter of 2023 for our Global Institutional & Specialty segment. Organic operating income margins increased 0.2 percentage points during the first quarter of 2023, as the 8.0 percentage point positive impacts from strong pricing overcame 6.9 percentage point negative impacts from investments in the business, higher delivered product cost and unfavorable mix.
Percentages in the above table do not necessarily sum due to rounding.
Organic sales for Global Healthcare & Life Sciences increased in the first quarter of 2023 driven by double-digit growth in Life Sciences and strong Healthcare sales growth.At an operating segment level, Healthcare organic sales increased 7% in the first quarter of 2023 reflecting accelerating pricing and continued growth in surgical programs​. Life Sciences organic sales increased 10% in the first quarter of 2023 driven by strong pricing, gains in consumable cleaning and disinfection program sales, as well as robust growth in Purolite’s water purification technologies and bioprocessing sales​.
Organic operating income and organic operating income margins decreased for our Global Healthcare & Life Sciences segment in the first quarter of 2023.Organic operating income margins decreased 2.8 percentage points during the first quarter of 2023, as the 7.6 percentage point positive impacts from strong pricing was more than offset by the 10.7 percentage point negative impact from lower volume, targeted investments in the business and higher delivered product cost.
Percentages in the above table do not necessarily sum due to rounding.
Organic sales for Other increased in the first quarter of 2023 reflecting double-digit growth across all divisions.At an operating segment level, Pest Elimination organic sales increased 13% in the first quarter of 2023 reflecting strong pricing and continued new business wins. Textile Care organic sales increased 17% in the first quarter of 2023. Colloidal Technologies Group organic sales increased 21% in the first quarter of 2023.
Organic operating income and organic operating income margins increased for Other in the first quarter of 2023.Organic operating income margins increased 2.3 percentage points during the first quarter of 2023, as the 8.8 percentage point positive impact from strong pricing overcame the 6.8 percentage point negative impact of investments in the business, higher delivered product cost and unfavorable mix.
Consistent with our internal management reporting, Corporate amounts in the table on page 35 include sales to ChampionX in accordance with the long-term supply agreement entered into with the Transaction post-separation, as discussed in Note 14, intangible asset amortization specifically from the Nalco and Purolite transactions and special (gains) and charges that are not allocated to our reportable segments. Items included within special (gains) and charges are shown in the table on page 31.
Total assets were $21.3 billion as of March 31, 2023, compared to total assets of $21.5 billion as of December 31, 2022.Total liabilities were $13.9 billion as of March 31, 2023, compared to total liabilities of $14.2 billion as of December 31, 2022. Total debt was $8.6 billion as of March 31, 2023 and $8.6 billion as of December 31, 2022. See further discussion of our debt activity within the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section of this MD&A.Our net debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) is shown in the following table. EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure discussed further in the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of this MD&A.The inputs to EBITDA reflect the trailing twelve months of activity for the period presented:
We continue to generate cash flow from operations, allowing us to fund our ongoing operations, acquisitions, investments in the business and pension obligations along with returning cash to our shareholders through dividend payments and share repurchases. Cash provided by operating activities increased $28 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, driven primarily by a $63 million increase in net income partially offset by $58 million net unfavorable change in working capital. The cash flow impact from working capital was primarily driven by decrease in accounts payable, partially offset by improvement in receivables and inventory.
Cash used for investing activities is primarily impacted by capital investments in the business.We continue to make capital investments in the business, including merchandising equipment, manufacturing equipment and facilities. Total capital expenditures were $174 million and $149 million in the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Our cash flows from financing activities primarily reflect the issuances and repayment of debt, common stock repurchases, proceeds from common stock issuances related to our equity incentive programs and dividend payments.We had net issuances of commercial paper and notes payable of $6 million and $82 million in the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Shares are repurchased for the purpose of partially offsetting the dilutive effect of our equity compensation plans, to manage our capital structure and to efficiently return capital to shareholders. We reacquired a total of $11 million and $262 million of shares in the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Cash proceeds and tax benefits from stock option exercises provide a portion of the funding for repurchase activity.There was no long-term debt issuance or repayment activity through the first quarter of 2023 or 2022.We paid dividends of $158 million and $154 million in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, respectively.
We currently expect to fund the cash requirements which are reasonably foreseeable for the next twelve months, including scheduled debt repayments, new investments in the business, share repurchases, dividend payments, possible business acquisitions and pension and postretirement contributions with cash from operating activities, and as needed, additional short-term and/or long-term borrowings. We continue to expect our operating cash flow to remain strong.As of March 31, 2023, we had $419 million of cash and cash equivalents on hand, of which $71 million was held outside of the U.S. We will continue to evaluate our cash position in light of future developments. As of March 31, 2023, we have a $2.0 billion multi-year credit facility which expires in April 2026. The credit facility has been established with a diverse syndicate of banks and supports our U.S. and Euro commercial paper programs. The maximum aggregate amount of commercial paper that may be issued under our U.S. commercial paper program and our Euro commercial paper program may not exceed $2.0 billion. At the end of the first quarter of 2023, we had no outstanding commercial paper under our U.S. program nor our Euro program. There were no borrowings under our credit facility as of March 31, 2023 or 2022. As of March 31, 2023, both programs were rated A-2 by Standard & Poor’s, P-2 by Moody’s and F-1 by Fitch. There was no long-term debt issuance or repayment activity through the first quarter of 2023. We are in compliance with our debt covenants and other requirements of our credit agreements and indentures. We believe we have sufficient borrowing capacity to meet our foreseeable operating activities, as needed. The schedule of contractual obligations included in the Financial Position and Liquidity section of our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 disclosed total notes payable and long-term debt due within one year of $505 million. As of March 31, 2023, the total notes payable and long-term debt due within one year was $1.1 billion. We had no outstanding commercial paper under our U.S. program as of March 31, 2023 and as of December 31, 2022. Our gross liability for uncertain tax positions was $24 million as of March 31, 2023 and $25 million as of December 31, 2022. We are not able to reasonably estimate the amount by which the liability will increase or decrease over time; however, at this time, we do not expect significant payments related to these obligations within the next year.
Approximately half of our sales are outside of the U.S. Our international operations subject us to changes in economic conditions and foreign currency exchange rates as well as political uncertainty in some countries which could impact future operating results. We expect a more challenging macroeconomic environment, especially in Europe, as the war and the energy crisis are having a significant impact on costs and demand. We also assume continued high delivered product costs and unfavorable currency translation and interest rate impacts that persist well into 2023.Argentina and Turkey are classified as highly inflationary economies in accordance with U.S. GAAP, and the U.S. dollar is the functional currency for our subsidiaries in Argentina and Turkey. During the first quarter of 2023, sales in Argentina represented less than 1% of our consolidated sales. Assets held in Argentina at the end of the first quarter of 2023 represented less than 1% of our consolidated assets. During the first quarter of 2023, sales in Turkey represented less than 1% of our consolidated sales. Assets held in Turkey at the end of the first quarter of 2023 represented less than 1% of our consolidated assets.In light of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the sanctions against Russia by the United States and other countries, we have made the determination that we will limit our Russian business to operations that are essential to life, providing minimal support for our healthcare, life sciences, food and beverage and certain water businesses. We may further narrow our presence in Russia depending on future developments. During the first quarter of 2023, our Russian and Ukraine operations represented approximately 1% of our 2023 consolidated net sales.
For information on new accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation” in Item 2, contains financial measures that have not been calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (GAAP). These non-GAAP measures include: ●Fixed currency sales●Organic sales, formerly known as acquisition adjusted fixed currency sales●Adjusted cost of sales●Adjusted gross margin●Fixed currency operating income●Fixed currency operating income margin●Adjusted operating income●Adjusted operating income margin●Adjusted fixed currency operating income●Adjusted fixed currency operating income margin●Organic operating income, formerly known as acquisition adjusted fixed currency operating income●Organic operating income margin, formerly known as acquisition adjusted fixed currency operating income margin
●Adjusted tax rate●Adjusted net income attributable to Ecolab●Adjusted diluted EPSWe provide these measures as additional information regarding our operating results. We use these non-GAAP measures internally to evaluate our performance and in making financial and operational decisions, including with respect to incentive compensation. We believe that our presentation of these measures provides investors with greater transparency with respect to our results of operations and that these measures are useful for period-to-period comparison of results. Our non-GAAP financial measures for adjusted cost of sales, adjusted gross margin and adjusted operating income exclude the impact of special (gains) and charges and our non-GAAP financial measures for adjusted tax rate, adjusted net income attributable to Ecolab and adjusted diluted earnings per share further exclude the impact of discrete tax items. We include items within special (gains) and charges and discrete tax items that we believe can significantly affect the period-over-period assessment of operating results and not necessarily reflect costs and/or income associated with historical trends and future results. After tax special (gains) and charges are derived by applying the applicable local jurisdictional tax rate to the corresponding pre-tax special (gains) and charges.
​EBITDA is defined as the sum of net income including noncontrolling interest, provision for income taxes, net interest expense, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA is used in our net debt to EBITDA ratio, which we view as important indicators of the operational and financial health of our organization. We evaluate the performance of our international operations based on fixed currency rates of foreign exchange. Fixed currency amounts included in this Form 10-Q are based on translation into U.S. dollars at the fixed foreign currency exchange rates established by management at the beginning of 2023. We also provide our segment results based on public currency rates for informational purposes. ​Our reportable segments do not include the impact of intangible asset amortization from the Nalco and Purolite transactions or the impact of special (gains) and charges as these are not allocated our reportable segments. ​Our non-GAAP financial measures for organic sales, organic operating income and organic operating income margin are at fixed currency and exclude the impact of special (gains) and charges, the results of our acquired businesses from the first twelve months post acquisition and the results of divested businesses from the twelve months prior to divestiture. As part of the separation of ChampionX in 2020, we entered into a Master Cross Supply and Product Transfer agreement with ChampionX to provide, receive or transfer certain products for a period of 36 months and for a small set of products with limited suppliers over the next few years. Sales of product to ChampionX under this agreement are recorded in product and equipment sales in the Corporate segment along with the related cost of sales. These transactions are removed from the consolidated results as part of the calculation of the impact of acquisitions and divestitures.​These non-GAAP measures are not in accordance with, or an alternative to U.S. GAAP, and may be different from non-GAAP measures used by other companies. Investors should not rely on any single financial measure when evaluating our business. We recommend that investors view these measures in conjunction with the U.S. GAAP measures included in this MD&A and we have provided reconciliations of reported U.S. GAAP amounts to the non-GAAP amounts.​​FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS​This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Item 2, contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements include our business performance and prospects; expectations concerning timing, amount and type of restructuring costs and savings from restructuring activities; macroeconomic environment, delivered product cost inflation, currency translation, and interest rates; Russian operations; working capital; capital investments, acquisitions and share repurchases; amortization expense; non-performance of financial counterparties; payments and contributions to pension and postretirement health care benefit plans; the impact of lawsuits, claims and environmental matters; impact of new accounting pronouncements and tax laws; cash flows, borrowing capacity and funding of cash requirements; payments related to uncertain tax positions; and implementation of ERP system upgrade.​Without limiting the foregoing, words or phrases such as “will likely result,” “are expected to,” “will continue,” “is anticipated,” “we believe,” “we expect,” “estimate,” “project” (including the negative or variations thereof) or similar terminology, generally identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements may also represent challenging goals for us. These statements, which represent our expectations or beliefs concerning various future events, are based on current expectations that involve a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those of such forward-looking statements. In particular, the ultimate results of any restructuring or efficiency initiative, integration and business improvement actions, including cost synergies, depend on a number of factors, including the development of final plans, the impact of local regulatory requirements regarding employee terminations, the time necessary to develop and implement the restructuring or efficiency initiative and other business improvement initiatives and the level of success achieved through such actions in improving competitiveness, efficiency and effectiveness. We caution that undue reliance should not be placed on such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made.​Some of the factors which could cause results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements are set forth under Item 1A of our most recent Form 10-K and our other public filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the "SEC"), and include the impact of economic factors such as the worldwide economy, capital flows, interest rates, foreign currency risk, reduced sales and earnings in our international operations resulting from the weakening of local currencies versus the U.S. dollar, demand uncertainty, supply chain challenges and inflation; the vitality of the markets we serve; exposure to global economic, political and legal risks related to our international operations, including geopolitical instability, the impact of sanctions or other actions taken by the U.S. or other countries, and retaliatory measures taken by Russia in response, in connection with the conflict in Ukraine; difficulty in procuring raw materials or fluctuations in raw material costs; our ability to attract, retain and develop high caliber management talent to lead our business and successfully execute organizational change and changing labor market dynamics; information technology infrastructure failures or breaches in data security; the effects and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic or other public health outbreaks, epidemics or pandemics; our ability to acquire complementary businesses and to effectively integrate such businesses, including Purolite; our ability to execute key business initiatives, including restructurings and our Enterprise Resource Planning system upgrades; our ability to successfully compete with respect to value, innovation and customer support; pressure on operations from consolidation of customers or vendors; restraints on pricing flexibility due to contractual obligations and our ability to meet our contractual commitments; the costs and effects of complying with laws and regulations, including those relating to the environment, climate change standards, and to the manufacture, storage, distribution, sale and use of our products, as well as to the conduct of our business generally, including labor and employment and anti-corruption; potential chemical spill or release; our commitments, goals, targets, objectives and initiatives related to sustainability; potential to incur significant tax liabilities or indemnification liabilities relating to the separation and split-off of our ChampionX business; the occurrence of litigation or claims, including class action lawsuits; the loss or insolvency of a major customer or distributor; repeated or 44
prolonged government and/or business shutdowns or similar events; acts of war or terrorism; natural or man-made disasters; water shortages; severe weather conditions; changes in tax laws and unanticipated tax liabilities; potential loss of deferred tax assets; our indebtedness, and any failure to comply with covenants that apply to our indebtedness; potential losses arising from the impairment of goodwill or other assets; and other uncertainties or risks reported from time to time in our reports to the SEC. There can be no assurances that our earnings levels will meet investors’ expectations. Except as may be required under applicable law, we do not undertake, and expressly disclaim, any duty to update our Forward-Looking Statements.