
We manufacture, market and sell beauty products including those in the skin care, makeup, fragrance and hair care categories, which are distributed in approximately 150 countries and territories. The following table is a comparative summary of operating results for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, and reflects the basis of presentation described in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for all periods presented. Products and services that do not meet our definition of skin care, makeup, fragrance and hair care have been included in the “other” category.
(1) The net sales from the Company's travel retail business are included in the Europe, the Middle East & Africa region, with the exception of net sales of Dr.Jart+ in the travel retail channel that are reflected in Korea in the Asia/Pacific region. Operating income attributable to the travel retail sales included in Europe, the Middle East & Africa is included in that region and in The Americas.The following table presents certain consolidated earnings data as a percentage of net sales:
Not adjusted for differences caused by roundingPeriod-over-period changes in our net sales are generally attributable to the impacts from (i) pricing on our base portfolio, including changes in mix and those due to strategic pricing actions, (ii) volume, including changes driven by the impact of new product innovation, (iii) acquisitions and/or divestitures, and/or (iv) foreign currency translation.The net sales impact from pricing consists of changes in list prices, due to strategic pricing actions, and mix shifts within and among product categories, geographic regions and distribution channels. The prices at which we sell our products vary by brand, distribution channel (e.g., wholesale or direct-to-consumer) and may also vary by country. Our brands and products cover a broad array of pricing tiers. Prices of skin care and fragrance products are typically higher than makeup and hair care products. New product innovation includes the introduction of new products, as well as changes related to existing products or where they are sold, including reformulations, regional expansion, repackaging and sets. A product is considered "new innovation" for the twelve-month period following the initial shipment date. Our innovation is launched at different price points than existing products and value derived from innovation may vary from year to year. We continually introduce new products, support new and established products through advertising, merchandising and sampling and phase out existing products that no longer meet the needs of our consumers or our objectives. The economics of developing, producing, launching, supporting and discontinuing products impact our sales and operating performance each period. The introduction of new products often has some cannibalizing effect on sales of existing products, which we take into account in our business planning. The impact of new product introductions, including timing compared to introductions in prior periods, also affects our results.
We use certain non-GAAP financial measures, among other financial measures, to evaluate our operating performance, which represent the manner in which we conduct and view our business. Management believes that excluding certain items that are not comparable from period to period helps investors and others compare operating performance between periods. While we consider the non-GAAP measures useful in analyzing our results, they are not intended to replace, or act as a substitute for, any presentation included in the consolidated financial statements prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. See Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.We operate on a global basis, with the majority of our net sales generated outside the United States. Accordingly, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates can affect our results of operations. Therefore, we present certain net sales, operating results and diluted net earnings per common share information excluding the effect of foreign currency rate fluctuations to provide a framework for assessing the performance of our underlying business outside the United States. Constant currency information compares results between periods as if exchange rates had remained constant period-over-period. We calculate constant currency information by translating current-period results using monthly average foreign currency exchange rates and adjusting for the period-over-period impact of foreign currency cash flow hedging activities.
We are a leader in prestige beauty, which combines the repeat purchase and relative affordability of consumer goods with high quality products and services. Within prestige beauty, we are well diversified by product category, geography, brand, product sub-category, channel, consumer segment and price point. We also leverage consumer analytics and insights with agility by deploying our brands to fast growing and profitable opportunities. These analytics and insights, combined with our creativity, inform our innovation to provide a broad, locally-relevant and inclusive range of prestige products allowing us to compete effectively for a greater share of a consumer's beauty routine. Elements of our strategy are described in the Overview on pages 30-32 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 2022, as well as below.During the fiscal 2023 third quarter, the phase and pace of recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic continued to vary across markets globally. In the West, in both developed and emerging markets, the momentum of post-COVID-19 recovery growth continued with net sales growth in The Americas and markets in Europe, the Middle East & Africa, excluding travel retail. In Asia/Pacific, markets emerged from COVID-19 restrictions more gradually and over a longer period of time, compared to the pace of recovery experienced in the West. These markets continued to evolve in recovery during the fiscal 2023 third quarter, evidenced by strong net sales growth in many Asia/Pacific markets.While we saw recovery in many markets globally, our Asia travel retail business continued to be pressured by the slower than anticipated recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically, in Hainan, while traffic into the island exceeded prior year levels, conversion of travelers to consumers in prestige beauty lagged. This led to the slower than anticipated depletion of elevated levels of retailer inventory and, therefore, lower replenishment orders. In Korea, the shipments to duty free retailers were pressured owing to the transition to post-COVID-19 regulations as traveling consumers gradually return. In Korea, as well as in Asia more broadly, the travel retail recovery was challenged by slower than anticipated resumption of international flights, granting of visas, and organized group tours. Our business also continued to be pressured by the strong U.S. dollar, historically high inflation and recession concerns.During the third quarter of fiscal 2023, net sales decreased 12%, reflecting the impacts noted above.•Our skin care net sales declined 20%, including the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of 3%, driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory.•Our makeup net sales decreased 2%, including the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of 2%, driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory. Partially offsetting these challenges were higher net sales from M·A·C, primarily driven by the recognition of the previously deferred revenue due to changes to the BACK-To-M·A·C take back program, and Clinique.•Our fragrance net sales increased slightly, primarily driven by growth from Le Labo, TOM FORD Beauty, Estée Lauder, Kilian Paris and Editions de Parfums Frédéric Malle, partially offset by the impact of the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 10% and the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of 3%. •Our hair care net sales increased slightly, driven by higher net sales from The Ordinary reflecting growth due to the recent launch of hair care products, offset by lower net sales from Aveda driven by a decline in the salon business and lower online net sales in North America.Our global distribution capability and operations allow us to focus on targeted expanded consumer reach wherever consumer demographics and trends are the most attractive. Our regional organizations, and the expertise of our people there, enable our brands to be more locally and culturally relevant in both product assortment and communications. We are evolving the way we connect with our consumers in stores, online and where they travel, including by expanding our digital and social media presence and the engagement of global and local influencers to amplify brand or product stories. We tailor implementation of our strategy by market to drive consumer engagement and embrace cultural diversity. We continuously strengthen our presence in large, image-building core markets, while broadening our presence in emerging markets.•Net sales in The Americas increased 3%, primarily driven by an increase in the United States, led by higher net sales from The Ordinary, partially offset by the impact of the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances effective June 30, 2022. Also contributing to the net sales increase in The Americas was an increase in net sales in Latin America, led by Mexico and Brazil, reflecting the continued recovery in makeup.•Net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa decreased 26% driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory.•Net sales in Asia/Pacific remained virtually flat, driven by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of 7%, partially offset by growth in Hong Kong, Australia and Southeast Asia as the region recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic.
We are experiencing a more gradual and prolonged recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in our Asia travel retail business. In Asia travel retail, there have been, and are likely to continue to be, impacts on our business in the near-term, from the slower than anticipated depletion of elevated levels of retailer inventory and, therefore, lower replenishment orders, as well as the slower than anticipated resumption of international flights, granting of visas, and organized group tours. Additionally, in Korea, the shipments to duty free retailers were pressured owing to the transition to post-COVID-19 regulations as traveling consumers gradually return. In addition to impacting net sales and profitability, including any unfavorable impacts to our effective tax rate from changes to our geographical mix of earnings, these and other challenges may adversely impact the goodwill and other intangible assets associated with our brands, as well as long-lived assets (i.e. potentially resulting in impairments). We believe that the best way to increase long-term stockholder value is to continue providing superior products and services in the most efficient and effective manner while recognizing shifts in consumers’ behaviors and shopping practices. Accordingly, our long-term strategy has numerous initiatives across geographic regions, product categories, brands, channels of distribution and functions designed to grow our sales, provide cost efficiencies, leverage our strengths and make us more productive and profitable. We plan to build upon and leverage our history of outstanding creativity and innovation, high quality products and services, and engaging communications while investing for long-term sustainable growth.We continue to monitor the effects of the global macro environment, including the risk of recession; currency volatility; inflationary pressures; supply chain challenges; social and political issues; regulatory matters, including the imposition of tariffs and sanctions; geopolitical tensions; and global security issues. For example, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar could negatively impact results within Europe, the Middle East & Africa due to pricing pressures on our retail customers and consumers in key international travel retail locations. Additionally, we continue to monitor the geopolitical tensions between the United States and China, which could have a material adverse effect on our business. We are also mindful of inflationary pressures on our cost base and are monitoring the impact on consumer preferences.  As the invasion of Ukraine continues and international sanctions evolve, we have substantially scaled down our operations in Russia based on our current plans. We expect to continue selling a limited selection of products to retailers in Russia. We will continue to monitor the risks and evolving situation that may further affect our business and will adjust our plans accordingly. In fiscal 2022, our net sales in Ukraine and Russia accounted for approximately 1% of consolidated net sales. There are uncertainties related to the future impacts on our business, including possible new sanctions that are difficult to predict due to the high level of geopolitical volatility. On a broader perspective, there could be additional negative impacts to our net sales, earnings, assets and cash flows from such uncertainties. We also note that worsening conditions could exacerbate economic challenges in other countries such as inflationary pressures, energy shortages, recessions or other consequences. Please refer to Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, for a more complete discussion of the risks we encounter in our business and industry.The uncertainty around the timing, speed and duration of the recovery from the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impacts on our business in Asia travel retail and China and the other macro challenges we are facing, will continue to affect our ability to grow sales profitably. We believe we can, to some extent, offset the impact of some of these challenges by continually developing and pursuing a diversified strategy with multiple engines of growth and by accelerating initiatives focused on areas of strength, discipline and agility, including continuing to execute upon and benefit from efficiencies attributable to previously approved initiatives under the Post-COVID Business Acceleration Program. As the current situation continues to progress, if economic and social conditions or the degree of uncertainty or volatility worsen, or the adverse conditions previously described are further prolonged, there could be a further negative effect on consumer confidence, demand, spending and willingness or ability to travel and, as a result, on our business. We are continuing to monitor these and other risks that may affect our business.
During the fiscal 2023 second quarter, given the lower-than-expected results in the overall business, we made revisions to the internal forecasts relating to our Smashbox reporting unit. We concluded that the changes in circumstances in the reporting unit triggered the need for an interim impairment review of its trademark intangible asset. The remaining carrying value of the trademark intangible asset was not recoverable and we recorded an impairment charge of $21 million reducing the carrying value to zero. During the fiscal 2023 second quarter, the Dr.Jart+ reporting unit experienced lower-than-expected growth within key geographic regions and channels that continue to be impacted by the spread of COVID-19 variants, resurgence in cases, and the potential future impacts relating to the uncertainty of the duration and severity of COVID-19 impacting the financial performance of the reporting unit. In addition, due to macro-economic factors, Dr.Jart+ has experienced lower-than-expected growth within key geographic regions. The Too Faced reporting unit experienced lower-than-expected results in key geographic regions and channels coupled with delays in future international expansion to areas that continue to be impacted by COVID-19. As a result, we made revisions to the internal forecasts relating to our Dr.Jart+ and Too Faced reporting units. Additionally, there were increases in the weighted average cost of capital for both reporting units as compared to the prior year annual goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment testing as of April 1, 2022.We concluded that the changes in circumstances in the reporting units, along with increases in the weighted average cost of capital, triggered the need for interim impairment reviews of their trademarks and goodwill. These changes in circumstances were also an indicator that the carrying amounts of Dr.Jart+’s and Too Faced’s long-lived assets, including customer lists, may not be recoverable. Accordingly, we performed interim impairment tests for the trademarks and a recoverability test for the long-lived assets as of November 30, 2022. We concluded that the carrying value of the trademark intangible assets exceeded their estimated fair values, which were determined utilizing the relief-from-royalty method to determine discounted projected future cash flows and recorded an impairment charge of $100 million for Dr.Jart+ and $86 million for Too Faced. We concluded that the carrying amounts of the long-lived assets were recoverable. After adjusting the carrying values of the trademarks, we completed interim quantitative impairment tests for goodwill. As the estimated fair value of the Dr.Jart+ and Too Faced reporting units were in excess of their carrying values, we concluded that the carrying amounts of the goodwill were recoverable and did not record a goodwill impairment charge related to these reporting units. The fair values of these reporting units were based upon an equal weighting of the income and market approaches, utilizing estimated cash flows and a terminal value, discounted at a rate of return that reflects the relative risk of the cash flows, as well as valuation multiples derived from comparable publicly traded companies that are applied to operating performance of the reporting units. The significant assumptions used in these approaches include revenue growth rates and profit margins, terminal values, weighted average cost of capital used to discount future cash flows and royalty rates for trademarks. The most significant unobservable input used to estimate the fair values of the Dr.Jart+ and Too Faced trademark intangible assets was the weighted-average cost of capital, which was 11% and 13%, respectively.A summary of the impairment charges for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 and the remaining trademark and goodwill carrying values as of March 31, 2023, for each reporting unit, are as follows:
The impairment charges for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were reflected in the skin care product category for Dr.Jart+ and the makeup product category for Smashbox and Too Faced.The fair value of the Dr.Jart+ and Too Faced trademarks were equal to their carrying values subsequent to the impairment charges taken as of December 31, 2022. Additionally, the estimated fair value of the Dr.Jart+ and Too Faced reporting units exceeded their carrying value by 7% and 10%, respectively. For the Dr.Jart+ and Too faced reporting units, if all other assumptions are held constant, a decrease of 10% in the estimated future cash flows, inclusive of the terminal value, or an increase of 100 basis points in the weighted average cost of capital, would have caused the carrying value of these reporting units to approximate their fair value. The key assumptions used to determine the estimated fair value of the reporting units and their respective trademarks are primarily predicated on the estimated future impacts of COVID-19, the success of future new product launches, the achievement of distribution expansion plans, and the realization of cost reduction and other efficiency efforts. If such plans do not materialize, or if there are further challenges in the business environments in which the reporting unit operates, resulting changes in the key assumptions could have negative impacts on the estimated fair value of the reporting units, and their respective trademarks, and it is possible we could recognize additional impairment charges in the future.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported net sales decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by lower net sales from the skin care and makeup product categories, partially offset by slightly higher net sales in the fragrance and hair care product categories. For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, reported net sales decreased due to lower net sales from the skin care, makeup and fragrance product categories, partially offset by higher net sales in the hair care product category. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, reported net sales decreased due to lower net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa, from our travel retail business, and in Asia/Pacific, partially offset by higher net sales in The Americas. For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, reported net sales decreased due to lower net sales from all geographic regions.The total net sales decrease was impacted by approximately $106 million and $564 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Returns associated with restructuring and other activities are not allocated to our product categories or geographic regions because they result from activities that are deemed a Company-wide initiative to redesign, resize and reorganize select corporate functions and go-to-market structures. Accordingly, the following discussions of Net sales by Product Categories and Geographic Regions exclude the impact of returns associated with restructuring and other activities for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 of $4 million and $10 million, respectively, and for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 of $1 million and $3 million, respectively.Reported net sales decreased 12% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 7%, the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 3%, the impact from the license terminations of certain of our designer fragrances of 1% and a decrease from pricing of 1%, due to the unfavorable impact from changes in mix, partially offset by strategic pricing actions.Reported net sales decreased 13% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 9%, the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 4% and the impact from the license terminations of certain of our designer fragrances of 1%. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase from pricing of 1%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported skin care net sales decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower net sales from La Mer, Estée Lauder, Dr.Jart+, Origins and Clinique, combined, of approximately $538 million, primarily driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory.Reported skin care net sales decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower net sales from Estée Lauder, La Mer, Dr.Jart+, Clinique and Origins, combined, of approximately $1,701 million, primarily driven by the evolution of the COVID-19 environment, including restrictions in mainland China and the rising number of COVID-19 cases (collectively the "COVID-19-Related Impacts") affecting Asia travel, including the tightening of inventory by certain of our retailers, retail traffic in mainland China and the Dr.Jart+ travel retail business in Korea during the first half of fiscal 2023. In addition, contributing to the decrease for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was the lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory for the three months ended March 31, 2023. Partially offsetting these decreases in skin care net sales for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were higher net sales from The Ordinary and M·A·C, combined, of approximately $78 million and $104 million, respectively. The increase in net sales from The Ordinary in both periods was driven by success of hero products, new product launches and expanded distribution. The increase in net sales from M·A·C for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by the fiscal 2023 third quarter launch of the Hyper Real franchise line of products. The skin care net sales decrease was impacted by approximately $61 million and $298 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively.Reported skin care net sales decreased 20% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 14%, the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 3% and a decrease from pricing of 3%, due to the unfavorable impact from changes in mix, partially offset by strategic pricing actions. Reported skin care net sales decreased 20% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 15%, the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 4% and a decrease from pricing of 1%, due to the unfavorable impact from changes in mix, partially offset by strategic pricing actions.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported makeup net sales decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower net sales from Estée Lauder and La Mer, combined, of approximately $89 million, primarily driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory. Reported makeup net sales decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower net sales from Estée Lauder, TOM FORD Beauty and La Mer, combined, of approximately $339 million, primarily driven by COVID-19-Related Impacts affecting Asia travel retail, and retail traffic in mainland China, during the first half of fiscal 2023. In addition, contributing to the decrease for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory during the three months ended March 31, 2023. Partially offsetting these decreases in makeup net sales for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 was an increase in net sales from M·A·C and Clinique, combined, of approximately $37 million and $79 million, respectively. The increase in net sales from M·A·C in both periods was driven by the recognition of previously deferred revenue due to changes to the BACK-To-M·A·C take back program. Net sales from Clinique increased in both periods, benefiting from solid performance in the lip, concealer and eye subcategories. Also partially offsetting the decreases in makeup net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, were increases in net sales from TOM FORD Beauty due to strength from products in the lip subcategory and increases in net sales from Too Faced driven by hero products, combined, of approximately $16 million.The makeup net sales decrease was impacted by approximately $28 million and $151 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively.Reported makeup net sales decreased 2% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 3% and the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 2%. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase from pricing of 3% due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.Reported makeup net sales decreased 7% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 5% and the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 4%. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase from pricing of 2% due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported fragrance net sales increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily reflecting higher net sales from Le Labo, TOM FORD Beauty, Estée Lauder, Kilian Paris and Editions de Parfums Frédéric Malle combined, of approximately $74 million. The increase in net sales from Le Labo reflected the continued success of hero product franchises and targeted expanded consumer reach. Net sales from Estée Lauder increased, reflecting a favorable year-over-year impact due to incremental sales of fragrance sets during the three months ended March 31, 2023, and success of the Beautiful and Estée Lauder Pleasures franchise line of products. The increase in net sales from TOM FORD Beauty reflected the continued success of Signature and Private Blend fragrances, expanded distribution and new product launches. Net sales from Kilian Paris increased, primarily driven by continued success of hero product franchises and new product launches. The increase in net sales from Editions de Parfums Frederic Malle reflected success of hero products and expanded distribution. Partially offsetting the increase in fragrance net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was the impact of the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances effective June 30, 2022 and lower net sales from Jo Malone London, combined, of approximately $70 million. Net sales from Jo Malone London decreased driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory.Reported fragrance net sales decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily reflecting the impact of the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances effective June 30, 2022 and lower net sales from Jo Malone London, combined, of approximately $233 million. The decrease in net sales from Jo Malone London primarily reflected COVID-19-Related Impacts affecting Asia travel retail, and retail traffic in mainland China, during the first half of fiscal 2023. In addition, contributing to the decrease for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory during the three months ended March 31, 2023.Partially offsetting the decrease in fragrance net sales for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were higher net sales from Estée Lauder, TOM FORD Beauty, Le Labo and Clinique, combined, of approximately $201 million. Net sales from Estée Lauder increased, reflecting the continued success from the Beautiful franchise line of products and successful performance during holiday and key shopping moments. Net sales from Le Labo increased, reflecting the continued success of hero product franchises, targeted expanded consumer reach and successful performance during holiday and key shopping moments. The increase in net sales from TOM FORD Beauty reflected the continued success of Signature and Private Blend fragrances, expanded distribution, new product launches and successful performance during holiday and key shopping moments. Net sales from Clinique increased, primarily reflecting growth in the Clinique Happy franchise line of products.Fragrance net sales were impacted by approximately $16 million and $100 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively.Reported fragrance net sales increased 1% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the increase from volume of 9% and the increase from pricing of 5%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix. Partially offsetting these increases was the impact from the license terminations of certain of our designer fragrances of 10% and the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 3%.Reported fragrance net sales decreased 1% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the impact from the license terminations of certain of our designer fragrances of 10% and the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 5%.  Partially offsetting these decreases was the increase from volume of 10% and the increase from pricing of 4%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported hair care net sales increased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by higher net sales from The Ordinary reflecting growth due to the recent launch of hair care products, partially offset by a decrease in net sales from Aveda. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, Aveda net sales decreased, due to a decline in the salon business and lower online net sales in North America. Net sales from Aveda decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by an unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation, partially offset by the fiscal 2023 first quarter distribution expansion into mainland China, new product launches and successful performance during holiday and key shopping moments.The hair care net sales increase was impacted by approximately $2 million and $14 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively.Reported hair care net sales increased 1% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the increase from volume of 4%, partially offset by the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 2% and the decrease from pricing of 1%, due to the unfavorable impact from changes in mix, partially offset by strategic pricing actions.Reported hair care net sales increased 3% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by an increase from pricing of 7%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix. Partially offsetting this increase was the decrease from volume of 1% and the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 3%.
We strategically time our new product launches by geographic market, which may account for differences in regional sales growth.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported net sales in The Americas increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by an increase in the United States and Latin America, combined of approximately $38 million. The increase in net sales in the United States for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was led by higher net sales from The Ordinary, partially offset by the impact of the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances effective June 30, 2022. Net sales in Latin America increased, led by Mexico and Brazil, reflecting continued recovery in makeup.Reported net sales in The Americas decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by a decrease in net sales in the United States of approximately $108 million, reflecting the tightening of inventory from certain of our retailers, lower shipments of replenishment orders in the fiscal 2023 second quarter and the impact of the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances. Partially offsetting the decrease in The Americas for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was an increase in net sales in Latin America of approximately $28 million, led by Brazil and Mexico, reflecting continued recovery in makeup.Net sales in The Americas were impacted by approximately $1 million of unfavorable and $13 million of favorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively.Reported net sales in The Americas increased 3% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the increase from volume of 6%, partially offset by the impact from the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 2% and the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1%. The impact from pricing was flat period-over-period, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions offset by changes in mix.Reported net sales in The Americas decreased 3% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 4% and the impact from the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 3%. Partially offsetting this decrease was an increase from pricing of 4%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported net sales decreased in Europe, the Middle East & Africa for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by lower net sales from our travel retail business of approximately $589 million, driven by lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory. Partially offsetting the decrease in net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was higher net sales from the United Kingdom and Germany combined, of approximately $31 million. The increase in net sales in the United Kingdom for the three months ended March 31, 2023 reflected higher net sales primarily in skin care, led by The Ordinary. Net sales in Germany increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by brick-and-mortar recovery.Reported net sales decreased in Europe, the Middle East & Africa for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by lower net sales from our travel retail business, Russia and the United Kingdom, combined, of approximately $1,273 million. The decrease in net sales from our travel retail business for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 reflects the COVID-19-Related Impacts affecting Asia travel retail, including the tightening of inventory by certain of our retailers during the first half of fiscal 2023. In addition, contributing to the decrease in our travel retail business for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was lower demand in our Asia travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory during the three months ended March 31, 2023. Net sales from Russia decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, as we sold a limited selection of products to certain retailers, and completed the closure of all of our freestanding stores during the first half of fiscal 2023. The decrease in net sales from the United Kingdom for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 is driven by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation, partially offset by brick-and-mortar recovery, reflecting an increase in traffic, compared to the prior-year period. Partially offsetting the decreases in net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were increases in net sales from Turkey and India, combined, of approximately $37 million. The net sales increase in Turkey was driven by growth in makeup and skin care. Net sales in India increased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 led by growth in makeup.Net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa were impacted by approximately $20 million and $205 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Reported net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa decreased 26% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 21%, a decrease from pricing of 3%, due to the unfavorable impact from changes in mix, partially offset by strategic pricing actions, the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 1% and the impact from the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 1%. Reported net sales in Europe, the Middle East & Africa decreased 20% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the decrease from volume of 15%, the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 3%, a decrease from pricing of 1%, due to the unfavorable impact from changes in mix, partially offset by strategic pricing actions, and the impact from the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 1%.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported net sales decreased in Asia/Pacific for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by the unfavorable impact of foreign currency translation of 7%, resulting in a decrease in net sales in mainland China, and lower net sales in Korea, led by the Dr.Jart+ travel retail business in Korea, combined, of approximately $68 million. The decrease in Asia/Pacific net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 reflected lower demand in our Dr.Jart+ travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory.Reported net sales decreased in Asia/Pacific for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by a decrease in net sales in mainland China and Korea, led by the Dr.Jart+ travel retail business in Korea, combined, of approximately $559 million, reflecting COVID-19-Related Impacts during the first half of fiscal 2023, combined with lower demand in our Dr.Jart+ travel retail business that resulted in lower product shipments as retailers reduced inventory.Partially offsetting the net sales decrease in Asia/Pacific for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were increases in Hong Kong, Australia and Southeast Asia, combined, of approximately $67 million, and increases in Southeast Asia, combined of $46 million, respectively, driven by the continued progression towards COVID-19 recovery.Net sales in Asia/Pacific were impacted by approximately $86 million and $373 million of unfavorable foreign currency translation for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Reported net sales in Asia/Pacific decreased 1% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 7% and the negative impact from the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 1%. Partially offsetting these decreases was the increase from volume of 6% and the increase from pricing of 1%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.Reported net sales in Asia/Pacific decreased 12% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, driven by the unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation of 8%, the decrease from volume of 4% and the impact from the license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances of 1%. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase from pricing of 1%, due to the favorable impact from strategic pricing actions, partially offset by changes in mix.
Gross margin decreased to 69.1% and 72.4% for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, as compared with 76.6% and 76.9% in the prior-year periods.
The decrease in gross margin for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 reflected unfavorable impacts from our mix of business, higher obsolescence charges and higher manufacturing costs and other. The unfavorable impact from our mix of business in both periods is primarily driven by brand mix, reflecting the lower gross margin of The Ordinary products, and category mix, driven by the decrease in skin care net sales, as well as higher costs associated with promotional items. The unfavorable impact from obsolescence charges is primarily due to excess inventory on hand and increased levels of inventory destruction driven by lower demand that resulted in lower product shipments. In both periods, manufacturing costs and other increased, driven by higher costs within our inventory deferrals recognized during the current-year periods for freight and material commodities.
Operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was 61.2% and 60.0% for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, as compared with 59.2% and 55.1% in the prior-year periods.
The unfavorable change in operating expense margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023, reflected unfavorable impacts relating to advertising, merchandising, sampling and product development, general and administrative expenses and selling expenses primarily driven by the decrease in net sales, as well as the unfavorable year-over-year impact for the change in fair value of acquisition-related stock options of $61 million relating to the fiscal 2021 increase in our investment in DECIEM, partially offset by the fiscal 2022 third quarter impact of other intangible asset impairments of $216 million. The unfavorable change in operating expense margin for the nine months ended March 31,2023 reflected unfavorable impacts relating to advertising, merchandising, sampling and product development, selling expenses, shipping expenses, and general and administrative expenses, driven by the decrease in net sales, as well as an unfavorable impact relating to store operating costs due to the brick-and-mortar recovery.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.The decrease in reported operating margin for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by a decrease in net sales, decrease in gross margin and the decrease in operating expense margin, discussed above. Charges associated with restructuring and other activities are not allocated to our product categories or geographic regions because they are centrally directed and controlled, are not included in internal measures of product category or geographic region performance and result from activities that are deemed Company-wide initiatives to redesign, resize and reorganize select areas of the business. Accordingly, the following discussions of Operating income by Product Categories and Geographic Regions exclude the impact of charges associated with restructuring and other activities.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported skin care operating income decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 reflecting lower operating results from Estée Lauder, La Mer and Clinique, combined, of approximately $529 million and decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower operating results from Estée Lauder, La Mer, Clinique and Origins, combined, of approximately $1,321 million, primarily driven by decreases in net sales. Skin care operating income also decreased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting the unfavorable year-over-year impact for the change in fair value of acquisition-related stock options of $59 million and $54 million, respectively, relating to the fiscal 2021 increase in our investment in DECIEM. Also contributing to the decrease in operating income from Clinique for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was higher cost of sales due to higher costs for promotional items. The decrease in operating results from Estée Lauder for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 also reflected a higher cost of sales, due, in part to an increase related to promotional items. Partially offsetting the decrease in operating results from La Mer for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was disciplined advertising and promotional expense management. Partially offsetting the decrease in operating results from Origins for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was disciplined advertising and promotional expense management, lower cost of sales due to the net sales decrease and lower selling expenses due to the closure of freestanding stores during fiscal 2023.Partially offsetting the decrease in skin care operating income for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 was the favorable year-over-year impact of other intangible asset impairments related to Dr.Jart+ of $205 million and $105 million, respectively.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported makeup operating income decreased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower results from Estée Lauder and La Mer, combined, of approximately $54 million and $213 million, respectively, primarily driven by a decrease in net sales. For the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, the decrease in operating income from Estée Lauder was partially offset by disciplined advertising and promotional expense management. For the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, the decrease in operating income from La Mer was partially offset by a decrease in cost of sales due to lower net sales compared to the prior-year period.Also contributing to the decrease in makeup operating income for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was the fiscal 2023 second quarter other intangible asset impairments related to Too Faced and Smashbox of $107 million, combined, and lower results from TOM FORD Beauty, driven by a decrease in net sales.Partially offsetting the decreases in makeup operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were higher results from Clinique and TOM FORD Beauty, combined, of approximately $16 million, driven by increases in net sales, partially offset by higher cost of sales, due, in part to an increase in promotional items. Partially offsetting the decrease in makeup operating income for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were higher results from M·A·C, primarily driven by the recognition of previously deferred revenue due to changes to the BACK-To-M·A·C take back program and disciplined advertising and promotional expense management, partially offset by an increase in cost of sales.
Reported fragrance operating income decreased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, reflecting lower results from Jo Malone London, driven by a decrease in net sales and higher cost of sales, due, in part to an increase in promotional items, as well and the impact of license terminations related to certain of our designer fragrances effective June 30, 2022, combined, of approximately $34 million and $127 million, respectively. Partially offsetting these decreases in both periods were higher results from Estée Lauder and Le Labo, combined, of approximately $34 million and $62 million, respectively, driven by increases in net sales. Contributing to the increase in operating income from Estée Lauder for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was disciplined advertising and promotional expense management. Contributing to the decrease in operating income from Jo Malone London for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was higher selling expenses due to increased staffing costs compared to the prior-year period.  Also contributing to the decrease in fragrance operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was lower results from TOM FORD Beauty, driven by higher advertising and promotional activities to support hero products and new product launches, and higher cost of sales due to the increase in net sales and selling expenses to support recovery, partially offset by an increase in net sales.
Reported hair care operating results decreased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by lower results from Aveda and Bumble and bumble, combined, of approximately $20 million and $54 million, respectively. In both periods, the lower results from Aveda were primarily driven by a decrease in net sales, higher cost of sales and higher advertising and promotional activities to support the brand's expansion into mainland China during fiscal 2023. Also contributing to the higher advertising and promotional activities for Aveda for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 were higher advertising and promotional activities to support holiday and key shopping moments. Operating results from Bumble and bumble decreased for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by higher cost of sales.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported operating results decreased in The Americas for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily reflecting lower operating results from North America of approximately $501 million. The decrease in operating results in North America is driven by the United States, primarily due to lower intercompany royalty income of $338 million compared to the prior-year-period, driven by a decrease in net sales in our travel retail business and higher cost of sales, partially offset by an increase in net sales. Also contributing to the decrease in operating income in North America was the unfavorable year-over-year impact for the change in fair value of acquisition-related stock options of $61 million relating to the fiscal 2021 increase in our investment in DECIEM.Reported operating results decreased in The Americas for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily reflecting lower operating results from North America of approximately $1,103 million. The decrease in operating results in North America is driven by the United States, primarily due to lower intercompany royalty income of $547 million compared to the prior-year period, driven by a decrease in net sales in our travel retail business, a decrease in net sales, and the unfavorable year-over-year impact of other intangible asset impairments of $96 million. Also contributing to the decrease in operating income in North America was the unfavorable year-over-year impact for the change in fair value of acquisition-related stock options of $56 million relating to the fiscal 2021 increase in our investment in DECIEM.
Reported operating income decreased in Europe, the Middle East & Africa for the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by lower results from our travel retail business of approximately $130 million and $514 million, respectively. For the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023, operating income decreased in our travel retail business reflecting the decrease in net sales, partially offset by the decrease in intercompany royalty expense to The Americas of $338 million and $547 million, respectively, due to the net sales decrease. Partially offsetting the operating income decrease in Europe, the Middle East & Africa for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was an increase in operating income in the United Kingdom, led by The Ordinary, driven by an increase in net sales.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” beginning on page 59 for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.Reported operating income increased in Asia/Pacific for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily reflecting the favorable year-over-year impact of other intangible asset impairments of $205 million, partially offset by lower operating results in Korea. Operating results in Korea decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, led by Dr.Jart+, driven by a decrease in net sales.Reported operating income decreased in Asia/Pacific for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, primarily reflecting decreases in operating results in mainland China, Korea and Japan, combined, of approximately $174 million, partially offset by the favorable year-over-year impact of other intangible asset impairments of $105 million and higher results from Southeast Asia due to increases in net sales, combined, of approximately $19 million. The lower operating results in mainland China for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by a decrease in net sales, partially offset by disciplined advertising and promotional expense management and lower selling costs compared to the prior-year period. Operating results in Korea decreased for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, led by Dr.Jart+, due to decreases in net sales, partially offset by lower selling expenses and cost of sales. For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, operating results in Japan decreased, driven by the decrease in net sales.
Interest expense increased in both periods, reflecting a higher debt balance due to the issuance of commercial paper during the fiscal 2023 third quarter and higher interest rates compared to the prior-year period. Interest income and investment income, net increased, primarily reflecting higher interest rates compared to the prior-year period.
The provision for income taxes represents U.S. federal, foreign, state and local income taxes. The effective rate differs from the federal statutory rate primarily due to the effect of state and local income taxes, the tax impact of share-based compensation, the taxation of foreign income and income tax reserve adjustments, which represent changes in our net liability for unrecognized tax benefits including tax settlements and lapses of the applicable statutes of limitations. Our effective tax rate will change from quarter-to-quarter based on recurring and non-recurring factors including the geographical mix of earnings, enacted tax legislation, state and local income taxes, tax reserve adjustments, the tax impact of share-based compensation, the interaction of various global tax strategies and the impact from certain acquisitions. In addition, changes in judgment from the evaluation of new information resulting in the recognition, derecognition or remeasurement of a tax position taken in a prior annual period are recognized separately in the quarter of change.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the increase in the effective tax rate was primarily attributable to a higher effective tax rate on the Company's foreign operations, due to the Company's geographical mix of earnings for fiscal 2023.For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, the increase in the effective tax rate was primarily attributable to a higher effective tax rate on the Company's foreign operations, due to the Company's geographical mix of earnings for fiscal 2023, and a decrease in excess tax benefits associated with stock-based compensation arrangements.
(1)See “Reconciliations of Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for reconciliations between non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
We use certain non-GAAP financial measures, among other financial measures, to evaluate our operating performance, which represent the manner in which we conduct and view our business. Management believes that excluding certain items that are not comparable from period to period, or do not reflect the Company’s underlying ongoing business, provides transparency for such items and helps investors and others compare and analyze our operating performance from period to period. In the future, we expect to incur charges or adjustments similar in nature to those presented below; however, the impact to the Company’s results in a given period may be highly variable and difficult to predict. Our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by, or determined in a manner consistent with, other companies. While we consider the non-GAAP measures useful in analyzing our results, they are not intended to replace, or act as a substitute for, any presentation included in the consolidated financial statements prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The following tables present Net sales, Operating income and Diluted net earnings per common share adjusted to exclude the impact of charges associated with restructuring and other activities; the change in fair value of acquisition-related stock options; other intangible asset impairments; and the effects of foreign currency translation.The following tables provide reconciliations between these non-GAAP financial measures and the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measures.
As diluted net earnings per common share, as adjusted, is used as a measure of the Company’s performance, we consider the impact of current and deferred income taxes when calculating the per-share impact of each of the reconciling items.The following tables reconcile the change in net sales by product category and geographic region, as reported, to the change in net sales excluding the effects of foreign currency translation:
The following tables reconcile the change in operating results by product category and geographic region, as reported, to the change in operating income excluding the impact of other intangible asset impairments and the change in fair value of acquisition-related stock options:
Our principal sources of funds historically have been cash flows from operations, borrowings pursuant to our commercial paper program, borrowings from the issuance of long-term debt and committed and uncommitted credit lines provided by banks and other lenders in the United States and abroad. At March 31, 2023, we had cash and cash equivalents of $5,531 million compared with $3,957 million at June 30, 2022. Our cash and cash equivalents are maintained at a number of financial institutions. To mitigate the risk of uninsured balances, we select financial institutions based on their credit ratings and financial strength, and we perform ongoing evaluations of these institutions to limit our concentration risk exposure.Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that cash on hand, cash generated from operations, available credit lines and access to credit markets will be adequate to support seasonal working capital needs, currently planned business operations, information technology enhancements, capital expenditures, acquisitions, dividends, stock repurchases, restructuring initiatives, commitments and other contractual obligations on both a near-term and long-term basis. The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“TCJA”) resulted in the Transition Tax on unrepatriated earnings of our foreign subsidiaries and changed the tax law in ways that present opportunities to repatriate cash without additional U.S. federal income tax. As a result, we changed our indefinite reinvestment assertion related to certain foreign earnings, and we continue to analyze the indefinite reinvestment assertion on our remaining applicable foreign earnings. We do not believe that continuing to reinvest our foreign earnings impairs our ability to meet our domestic debt or working capital obligations. If these reinvested earnings were repatriated into the United States as dividends, we would be subject to state income taxes and applicable foreign taxes in certain jurisdictions.The effects of inflation have not been significant to our overall operating results in recent years; however, we have experienced inflationary pressures during the current year. Generally, we have been able to introduce new products at higher prices, increase prices and implement other operating efficiencies to offset some of these cost increases.On April 28, 2023, we completed the acquisition of the TOM FORD brand that we announced in November 2022. The amount paid by us at closing was approximately $2,250 million. This amount was funded by cash on hand and proceeds from the issuance of commercial paper, and approximately $250 million received at closing from Marcolin S.p.A. (a continuing TOM FORD licensee). An aggregate amount of $300 million in deferred payments, at 5% interest per annum, to the sellers becomes due from us beginning in July 2025. The completion of the acquisition of the brand resulted in the elimination of the existing license royalty payments on our TOM FORD Beauty business.
Changes in our credit ratings will likely result in changes in our borrowing costs. Our credit ratings also impact the cost of our revolving credit facility. Downgrades in our credit ratings may reduce our ability to issue commercial paper and/or long-term debt and would likely increase the relative costs of borrowing. A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell, or hold securities, is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and should be evaluated independently of any other rating. As of April 26, 2023, our long-term debt is rated A+ with a stable outlook by Standard & Poor’s and A1 with a stable outlook by Moody’s.
At March 31, 2023, our outstanding borrowings were as follows:
(1)Consists of $650 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $8 million and debt issuance costs of $6 million.(2)Consists of $500 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $1 million and debt issuance costs of $5 million.(3)Consists of $450 million principal, net unamortized debt premium of $9 million and debt issuance costs of $5 million.(4)Consists of $250 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $1 million and debt issuance costs of $2 million.(5)Consists of $300 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $3 million and debt issuance costs of $2 million.(6)Consists of $200 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $2 million and debt issuance costs of $1 million.(7)Consists of $600 million, principal, unamortized debt discount of $3 million, debt issuance costs of $4 million and a $37 million loss to reflect the fair value of interest rate swaps.(8)Consists of $700 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $1 million, debt issuance costs of $3 million and a $94 million loss to reflect the fair value of interest rate swaps.(9)Consists of $650 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $4 million and debt issuance costs of $3 million.(10)Consists of $500 million principal and debt issuance costs of $1 million.(11)Consists of $500 million principal, unamortized debt discount of $1 million and debt issuance costs of $1 million.(12)The Senior Notes contain certain customary incurrence–based covenants, including limitations on indebtedness secured by liens.(13)Consists of $2,250 million principal and unamortized debt discount of $17 million.Total debt as a percent of total capitalization was 56% and 49% at March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022, respectively.In January 2023, we entered into a $2,000 million senior unsecured revolving credit facility that expires on January 2, 2024 (the “364-Day Facility”) for liquidity support for our commercial paper program and general corporate purposes, of which the entire amount is currently undrawn and available. Interest rates on borrowings under the 364-Day Facility will be based on prevailing market interest rates in accordance with the agreement.In January 2023, in connection with the 364-Day Facility, we increased our commercial paper program under which we may issue commercial paper in the United States from $2,500 million to $4,500 million. As of April 26, 2023, we had $3,410 million outstanding under our commercial paper program.
The change in net cash flows provided by operating activities primarily reflected lower earnings before tax, excluding non-cash items, partially offset by the favorable change in working capital, reflecting a favorable change in accounts receivable and inventory and promotional merchandise, partially offset by lower other accrued and noncurrent liabilities, which includes the settlement of net investment hedges and lower accounts payable due to timing of payments.The change in net cash flows used for investing activities primarily reflected a favorable impact from the settlement of net investment hedges, which is offset by the unfavorable change in other accrued liabilities as discussed above.The change in net cash flows provided by (used for) financing activities primarily reflected an increase in current debt due to the increase in proceeds from commercial paper and lower treasury stock repurchases compared to the prior-year period, partially offset by an increase in repayments of long-term debt.
There have been no significant changes to our pension and post-retirement funding as discussed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
There have been no other significant changes to our commitments and contractual obligations as discussed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, except as disclosed in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 8 – Commitments and Contingencies. For a discussion of contingencies, see Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, Note 8 – Commitments and Contingencies.
We address certain financial exposures through a controlled program of market risk management that includes the use of foreign currency forward contracts to reduce the effects of fluctuating foreign currency exchange rates and to mitigate the change in fair value of specific assets and liabilities on the balance sheet. To perform a sensitivity analysis of our foreign currency forward contracts, we assess the change in fair values from the impact of hypothetical changes in foreign currency exchange rates. A hypothetical 10% weakening of the U.S. dollar against the foreign exchange rates for the currencies in our portfolio would have resulted in a net decrease in the fair value of our portfolio of approximately $301 million and $259 million as of March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022, respectively. This potential change does not consider our underlying foreign currency exposures.We also enter into cross-currency swap contracts to hedge the impact of foreign currency changes on certain intercompany foreign currency denominated debt. A hypothetical 10% weakening of the U.S. dollar against the foreign exchange rates for the currencies in our cross-currency swap contracts would have resulted in a net decrease in the fair value of our cross-currency swap contracts of approximately $49 million as of March 31, 2023.In addition, we enter into interest rate derivatives to manage the effects of interest rate movements on our aggregate liability portfolio, including future debt issuances. Based on a hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates, the estimated fair value of our interest rate derivatives would decrease by approximately $11 million and $41 million as of March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022, respectively. Our sensitivity analysis represents an estimate of reasonably possible net losses that would be recognized on our portfolio of derivative financial instruments assuming hypothetical movements in future market rates and is not necessarily indicative of actual results, which may or may not occur. It does not represent the maximum possible loss or any expected loss that may occur, since actual future gains and losses will differ from those estimated, based upon actual fluctuations in market rates, operating exposures, and the timing thereof, and changes in our portfolio of derivative financial instruments during the year. We believe, however, that any such loss incurred would be offset by the effects of market rate movements on the respective underlying transactions for which the derivative financial instrument was intended.
We do not maintain any off-balance sheet arrangements, transactions, obligations or other relationships with unconsolidated entities that would be expected to have a material current or future effect upon our financial condition or results of operations.
As disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, the discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses reported in those financial statements. These estimates and assumptions can be subjective and complex, and consequently, actual results could differ from those estimates. Our most critical accounting policies relate to goodwill, other intangible assets and long-lived assets - impairment assessment and income taxes. Since June 30, 2022, there have been no significant changes to the assumptions and estimates related to our critical accounting policies, except as disclosed in
on pages 39-40.
We and our representatives from time to time make written or oral forward-looking statements, including in this and other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, in our press releases and in our reports to stockholders, which may constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such statements may address our expectations regarding sales, earnings or other future financial performance and liquidity, other performance measures, product introductions, entry into new geographic regions, information technology initiatives, new methods of sale, our long-term strategy, restructuring and other charges and resulting cost savings, and future operations or operating results. These statements may contain words like “expect,” “will,” “will likely result,” “would,” “believe,” “estimate,” “planned,” “plans,” “intends,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “project,” “projected,” “forecast,” and “forecasted” or similar expressions. Although we believe that our expectations are based on reasonable assumptions within the bounds of our knowledge of our business and operations, actual results may differ materially from our expectations. Factors that could cause actual results to differ from expectations include, without limitation:(1)increased competitive activity from companies in the skin care, makeup, fragrance and hair care businesses;(2)our ability to develop, produce and market new products on which future operating results may depend and to successfully address challenges in our business;(3)consolidations, restructurings, bankruptcies and reorganizations in the retail industry causing a decrease in the number of stores that sell our products, an increase in the ownership concentration within the retail industry, ownership of retailers by our competitors or ownership of competitors by our customers that are retailers and our inability to collect receivables;(4)destocking and tighter working capital management by retailers;(5)the success, or changes in timing or scope, of new product launches and the success, or changes in timing or scope, of advertising, sampling and merchandising programs;(6)shifts in the preferences of consumers as to where and how they shop;(7)social, political and economic risks to our foreign or domestic manufacturing, distribution and retail operations, including changes in foreign investment and trade policies and regulations of the host countries and of the United States;(8)changes in the laws, regulations and policies (including the interpretations and enforcement thereof) that affect, or will affect, our business, including those relating to our products or distribution networks, changes in accounting standards, tax laws and regulations, environmental or climate change laws, regulations or accords, trade rules and customs regulations, and the outcome and expense of legal or regulatory proceedings, and any action we may take as a result;(9)foreign currency fluctuations affecting our results of operations and the value of our foreign assets, the relative prices at which we and our foreign competitors sell products in the same markets and our operating and manufacturing costs outside of the United States;(10)changes in global or local conditions, including those due to volatility in the global credit and equity markets, natural or man-made disasters, real or perceived epidemics, supply chain challenges, inflation, or increased energy costs, that could affect consumer purchasing, the willingness or ability of consumers to travel and/or purchase our products while traveling, the financial strength of our customers, suppliers or other contract counterparties, our operations, the cost and availability of capital which we may need for new equipment, facilities or acquisitions, the returns that we are able to generate on our pension assets and the resulting impact on funding obligations, the cost and availability of raw materials and the assumptions underlying our critical accounting estimates;(11)impacts attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic, including disruptions to our global business;(12)shipment delays, commodity pricing, depletion of inventory and increased production costs resulting from disruptions of operations at any of the facilities that manufacture our products or at our distribution or inventory centers, including disruptions that may be caused by the implementation of information technology initiatives, or by restructurings;(13)real estate rates and availability, which may affect our ability to increase or maintain the number of retail locations at which we sell our products and the costs associated with our other facilities;(14)changes in product mix to products which are less profitable;(15)our ability to acquire, develop or implement new information and distribution technologies and initiatives on a timely basis and within our cost estimates and our ability to maintain continuous operations of such systems and the security of data and other information that may be stored in such systems or other systems or media;(16)our ability to capitalize on opportunities for improved efficiency, such as publicly-announced strategies and restructuring and cost-savings initiatives, and to integrate acquired businesses and realize value therefrom;(17)consequences attributable to local or international conflicts around the world, as well as from any terrorist action, retaliation and the threat of further action or retaliation;(18)the timing and impact of acquisitions, investments and divestitures; and(19)additional factors as described in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.We assume no responsibility to update forward-looking statements made herein or otherwise.