
Amounts are in millions of dollars or shares unless indicated otherwise (per share data assume dilution). Columns and rows may not add and the sum of components may not equal total amounts reported due to rounding.
Eaton Corporation plc (Eaton or the Company) is an intelligent power management company dedicated to improving the quality of life and protecting the environment for people everywhere. We are guided by our commitment to do business right, to operate sustainably and to help our customers manage power – today and well into the future. By capitalizing on the global growth trends of electrification and digitalization, we're accelerating the planet's transition to renewable energy, helping to solve the world's most urgent power management challenges, and doing what's best for our stakeholders and all of society.Eaton’s businesses are well-positioned to take advantage of secular growth trends related to the energy transition from fossil fuels to renewables. We are responding to these trends by innovating solutions that transform the electrical power value chain, investing in electrical vehicle markets, increasing our focus on electrification, and employing digital technologies for power management. The Company’s innovations are expected to enable the integration of renewables and sustainability solutions, with new types of equipment, services, and software. These strategic focus areas are an important part of our response to climate change.Additionally, over the past several years, Eaton has completed a number of transactions to add higher growth, better margin businesses to its portfolio. These portfolio updates have the Company better aligned with secular growth trends and well positioned for expected further growth. These changes to our portfolio of businesses along with double digit organic sales growth and operational performance has led to 20% growth in our net income per share in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022.Founded in 1911, 2023 marks Eaton's 100th anniversary of being listed on the New York Stock Exchange. We reported revenues of $20.8 billion in 2022 and serve customers in more than 170 countries.
The Company continues to actively manage its portfolio of businesses to deliver on its strategic objectives. The Company is focused on deploying its capital toward businesses that provide opportunities for above-market growth, strong returns, and align with secular trends and its power management strategies. During 2022 and 2023, Eaton continued to selectively add businesses to strengthen its portfolio.
Additional information related to acquisitions and divestiture of businesses is presented in Note 2.
The following discussion of Consolidated Financial Results includes certain non-GAAP financial measures. These financial measures include adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per ordinary share, each of which differs from the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). A reconciliation of adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings per ordinary share to the most directly comparable GAAP measure is included in the Consolidated Financial Results table below. Management believes that these financial measures are useful to investors because they provide additional meaningful financial information that should be considered when assessing our business performance and trends, and they allow investors to more easily compare Eaton’s financial performance period to period. Management uses this information in monitoring and evaluating the on-going performance of Eaton.
Eaton incurs integration charges and transaction costs to acquire and integrate businesses, and transaction, separation and other costs to divest and exit businesses. Eaton also recognizes gains and losses on the sale of businesses. A summary of these Corporate items is as follows:
Acquisition integration, divestiture charges and transaction costs in 2023 and 2022 are primarily related to the acquisition of Royal Power Solutions and other acquisitions completed prior to 2022, and other charges and income to acquire and exit businesses. These charges were included in Cost of products sold, Selling and administrative expense, Research and development expense, or Other income - net. In Business Segment Information in Note 16, the charges were included in Other expense - net.
In the second quarter of 2020, Eaton initiated a multi-year restructuring program to reduce its cost structure and gain efficiencies in its business segments and at corporate in order to respond to declining market conditions brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic. Since the inception of the program, the Company has incurred charges of $335 million. These restructuring activities are expected to be completed in 2023 with total estimated charges of $350 million cumulatively for the entire program and projected mature year savings of $250 million when fully implemented. The remaining charges in 2023 are expected to relate primarily to plant closing and other costs. Additional information related to this restructuring is presented in Note 15.
Intangible asset amortization expense is as follows:
Organic sales increased 15% in the first quarter of 2023 due to broad-based strength in end-markets of the Electrical Americas and Electrical Global business segments, strength in sales to commercial OEM and aftermarket in the Aerospace business segment, and higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery for both Vehicle and eMobility business segments.
Gross profit margin increased from 32.5% in the first quarter of 2022 to 34.4% in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery. Conversely, wage and commodity inflation, and operating inefficiencies had an unfavorable impact on gross margin, despite offsetting price actions.
The effective income tax rate for the first quarter of 2023 was expense of 16.1% compared to expense of 13.9% for the first quarter of 2022. The increase in the effective tax rate in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to greater levels of income in higher tax jurisdictions and a smaller impact from the excess tax benefits recognized for employee share-based payments in the quarter.
Changes in Net income attributable to Eaton ordinary shareholders and Net income per share attributable to Eaton ordinary shareholders - diluted are summarized as follows:
The following is a discussion of Net sales, operating profit and operating margin by business segment.
Net sales increased 21% in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022 due to a 22% increase in organic sales with a small offset from negative currency translation. The increase in organic sales reflects broad-based strength in end-markets, with particular strength in commercial & institutional, utility, and data center end-markets. The operating margin increased from 19.1% in the first quarter of 2022 to 22.9% in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery, partially offset by wage and commodity inflation.
The increase in organic sales in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to strength in utility, data center and distributed IT end-markets.The operating margin decreased from 19.4% in the first quarter of 2022 to 18.3% in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to operating inefficiencies from ongoing, but improving, supply chain constraints and higher costs to support growth initiatives, partially offset by higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery.
The increase in organic sales in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to strength in sales to commercial OEM and aftermarket. The operating margin increased from 22.1% in the first quarter of 2022 to 22.5% in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery, partially offset by commodity and wage inflation.
The increase in organic sales in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to strength in the North America truck and light vehicle markets, South American truck, bus and agriculture markets, and European light vehicle markets.The operating margin decreased from 16.8% in the first quarter of 2022 to 14.5% in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to commodity and wage inflation, and operating inefficiencies, partially offset by higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery.
The increase in organic sales in the first quarter of 2023 was due to strength in North American and European markets primarily due to robust demand for electric vehicles. The operating margin decreased from negative 2.4% in the first quarter of 2022 to negative 2.7% in the first quarter of 2023 primarily due to manufacturing start-up costs associated with new electric vehicle programs, and wage and commodity inflation, partially offset by higher sales volumes including inflationary pricing recovery.
Total corporate expense was $320 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $290 million in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in Total corporate expense for the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to higher Interest expense - net and Other expense - net. The increase in Other expense - net is primarily due to the 2022 gain on sale of the Hydraulics business discussed in Note 2.
Eaton’s objective is to finance its business through operating cash flow and an appropriate mix of equity and long-term and short-term debt. By diversifying its debt maturity structure, Eaton reduces liquidity risk. On March 3, 2023, a subsidiary of Eaton issued Euro denominated notes (2023 Euro Notes) in a private issuance with a face value of €300 million ($318 million). The floating rate notes are due June 3, 2024 with interest payable quarterly based on the three-month Euro Interbank Offered Rate plus 25 basis points. Proceeds from the Euro Notes were used to pay down outstanding U.S. dollar commercial paper. The 2023 Euro Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on an unsubordinated, unsecured basis by Eaton. The 2023 Euro Notes contain a change of control provision which requires the Company to make an offer to purchase all or any part of the 2023 Euro Notes at a purchase price of 100.5% of the principal amount plus accrued and unpaid interest. The 2023 Euro Notes are subject to customary non-financial covenants.The Company maintains revolving credit facilities consisting of a $500 million 364-day revolving credit facility that will expire on October 2, 2023 and a $2,500 million five-year revolving credit facility that will expire on October 1, 2027. The revolving credit facilities totaling $3,000 million are used to support commercial paper borrowings and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Eaton and certain of its direct and indirect subsidiaries on an unsubordinated, unsecured basis. There were no borrowings outstanding under Eaton’s revolving credit facilities at March 31, 2023. The Company maintains access to the commercial paper markets through its $3,000 million commercial paper program, of which $59 million was outstanding on March 31, 2023, used primarily to manage fluctuations in working capital.In 2022, the Company paid $610 million to acquire Royal Power Solutions and received cash of $22 million from Danfoss A/S to fully settle all post-closing adjustments from the sale of the Hydraulics business.Over the course of a year, cash, short-term investments, and short-term debt may fluctuate in order to manage global liquidity. As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, Eaton had cash of $235 million and $294 million, short-term investments of $289 million and $261 million, and short-term debt of $87 million and $324 million, respectively. Eaton believes it has the operating flexibility, cash flow, cash and short-term investment balances, availability under existing revolving credit facilities, and access to capital markets in excess of the liquidity necessary to meet future operating needs of the business, fund capital expenditures and acquisitions of businesses, as well as scheduled payments of long-term debt.Eaton was in compliance with each of its debt covenants for all periods presented.
A summary of cash flows is as follows:
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $293 million in the first three months of 2023 compared to 2022 primarily due to lower working capital balances and higher net income in 2023, partially offset by cash received from the termination of interest rate swaps in 2022.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased by $638 million in the first three months of 2023 compared to 2022 primarily driven by no cash paid for business acquisitions in 2023 compared to cash paid for business acquisitions of $612 million in 2022.
Net cash used in financing activities increased by $933 million in the first three months of 2023 compared to 2022 primarily due to net payments of short-term debt of $236 million in 2023 compared to net proceeds of short-term debt of $1,105 million in 2022, partially offset by higher proceeds from borrowings of $318 million in 2023 compared to no proceeds from borrowings in 2022, and no repurchase of shares in 2023 compared to repurchase of shares of $86 million in 2022.
Capital expenditures were $126 million and $115 million in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Eaton expects approximately $700 million in capital expenditures in 2023.
Cash dividend payments were $334 million and $320 million in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Payment of quarterly dividends in the future depends upon the Company’s ability to generate net income and operating cash flows, among other factors, and is subject to declaration by the Eaton Board of Directors. The Company intends to continue to pay quarterly dividends in 2023.
On February 27, 2019, the Board of Directors adopted a share repurchase program for share repurchases up to $5.0 billion of ordinary shares (2019 Program). On February 23, 2022, the Board renewed the 2019 Program by providing authority for up to $5.0 billion in repurchases to be made during the three-year period commencing on that date (2022 Program). Under the 2022 Program, the ordinary shares are expected to be repurchased over time, depending on market conditions, the market price of ordinary shares, capital levels, and other considerations. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, no ordinary shares were repurchased. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, 0.6 million ordinary shares were repurchased under the 2022 program in the open market at a total cost of $86 million. At March 31, 2023, there is $4,714 million still available for share repurchases under the 2022 Program. The Company will continue to pursue share repurchases in 2023 depending on market conditions and capital levels.
The Company paid cash of $612 million to acquire a business in the first three months of 2022. There were no business acquisitions in the first three months of 2023. The Company will continue to focus on deploying its capital toward businesses that provide opportunities for higher growth and strong returns, and align with secular trends and its power management strategies.
The Company manages a number of short-term and long-term debt instruments, including commercial paper. At March 31, 2023, the Company had Short-term debt of $87 million, Current portion of long-term debt of $8 million, and Long-term debt of $8,701 million.
A third-party financial institution offers a voluntary supply chain finance (SCF) program that enables certain of the Company’s suppliers, at the supplier’s sole discretion, to sell receivables due from the Company to the financial institution on terms directly negotiated with the financial institution. The SCF program does not have a significant impact on the Company’s liquidity as payments by the Company to participating suppliers are paid to the financial institution on the invoice due date, regardless of whether an individual invoice is sold by the supplier to the financial institution. For additional information on the SCF program, see Note 7.
Eaton Corporation has issued senior notes pursuant to indentures dated April 1, 1994 (the 1994 Indenture), November 20, 2012 (the 2012 Indenture), September 15, 2017 (the 2017 Indenture) and August 23, 2022 (as supplemented by the First and Second Supplemental Indentures of the same date, the 2022 Indenture). The senior notes of Eaton Corporation are registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the Registered Senior Notes). Eaton Capital Unlimited Company, a subsidiary of Eaton, is the issuer of five outstanding series of debt securities sold in offshore transactions under Regulation S promulgated under the Securities Act (the Eurobonds). The Eurobonds and the Registered Senior Notes (together, the Senior Notes) comprise substantially all of Eaton’s long-term indebtedness.Substantially all of the Senior Notes (with limited exceptions, for example, see Note 8 of the Financial Statements included herewith), together with the credit facilities described above under Liquidity and Financial Condition (the Credit Facilities), are guaranteed by Eaton and 17 of its subsidiaries. Accordingly, they rank equally with each other. However, because these obligations are not secured, they would be effectively subordinated to any existing or future secured indebtedness of Eaton and its subsidiaries. As of March 31, 2023, Eaton has no material, long-term secured debt. The guaranteed Registered Senior Notes are also structurally subordinated to the liabilities of Eaton's subsidiaries that are not guarantors. Except as described below under Future Guarantors, Eaton is not obligated to cause its subsidiaries to guarantee the Registered Senior Notes.The table set forth in Exhibit 22 filed with the Form 10-K filed on February 23, 2023 (10-K Exhibit 22) details the primary obligors and guarantors with respect to the guaranteed Registered Senior Notes.
Payment of principal and interest on the Registered Senior Notes is guaranteed, on an unsecured, unsubordinated basis by the subsidiaries of Eaton set forth in the table referenced in the 10-K Exhibit 22. Each guarantee is full and unconditional, and joint and several. Each guarantor's guarantee is an unsecured obligation that ranks equally with all its other unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. The obligations of each guarantor under its guarantee of the Registered Senior Notes is subject to a customary savings clause or similar provision designed to prevent such guarantee from constituting a fraudulent conveyance or otherwise legally impermissible or voidable obligation.Though the terms of the indentures vary slightly, generally, each guarantee of the Registered Senior Notes by a guarantor that is a subsidiary of Eaton Corporation provides that it will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged under certain circumstances, including, but not limited to:(a)the consummation of certain types of transactions permitted under the applicable indenture, including one that results in such guarantor ceasing to be a subsidiary; and (b)for Registered Senior Notes issued under the 2022 Indenture, when such guarantor is a guarantor or issuer of indebtedness in an aggregate outstanding principal amount of less than 25% of our total outstanding indebtedness.Further, each guarantee by a direct or indirect parent of Eaton Corporation (other than Eaton) provides that it will also be released if:(c)such guarantee (so long as the guarantor is not obligated under any other U.S. debt obligations), becomes prohibited by any applicable law, rule or regulation or by any contractual obligation; or (d)such guarantee results in material adverse tax consequences to Eaton or any of its subsidiaries (so long as the applicable guarantor is not obligated under any other U.S. debt obligation).The guarantee of Eaton does not contain any release provisions.
The 2012 and 2017 Indentures generally provide that, with certain limited exceptions, any subsidiary of Eaton must become a guarantor if it becomes obligated as borrower or guarantor under any series of debt securities or a syndicated credit facility. Further, the 2012 and 2017 Indentures provide that any entity that becomes a direct or indirect parent entity of Eaton Corporation and holds any material assets, with certain limited exceptions, or owes any material liabilities must become a guarantor. The 2022 Indenture provides only that, with certain limited exceptions, any subsidiary of Eaton must become a guarantor if it becomes obligated as borrower or guarantor under indebtedness with an aggregate outstanding principal amount in excess of 25% of the Parent and its Subsidiaries' then-outstanding indebtedness.The 1994 Indenture does not contain provisions with respect to future guarantors.
The financial information presented is that of Eaton Corporation and the Guarantors, which includes Eaton Corporation plc, on a combined basis and the financial information of non-issuer and non-guarantor subsidiaries has been excluded. Intercompany balances and transactions between Eaton Corporation and Guarantors have been eliminated, and amounts due from, amounts due to, and transactions with non-issuer and non-guarantor subsidiaries have been presented separately.
This Form 10-Q Report contains forward-looking statements concerning our acquisition strategy, litigation, expected capital expenditures, future dividend payments, anticipated share repurchases, and expected restructuring program charges and benefits. These statements may discuss goals, intentions and expectations as to future trends, plans, events, results of operations or financial condition, or state other information relating to Eaton, based on current beliefs of management as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, management. Forward-looking statements generally will be accompanied by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “guidance,” “intend,” “may,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project” or other similar words, phrases or expressions. These statements should be used with caution and are subject to various risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside Eaton’s control. The following factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements: the course of the COVID-19 pandemic, including government responses thereto and the rate of global economic recovery therefrom; unanticipated changes in the markets for the Company’s business segments; unanticipated downturns in business relationships with customers or their purchases from us; the availability of credit to customers and suppliers; supply chain disruptions, competitive pressures on sales and pricing; unanticipated changes in the cost of material, labor and other production costs, or unexpected costs that cannot be recouped in product pricing; the introduction of competing technologies; unexpected technical or marketing difficulties; unexpected claims, charges, litigation or dispute resolutions; strikes or other labor unrest; the impact of acquisitions and divestitures; unanticipated difficulties integrating acquisitions; new laws and governmental regulations; interest rate changes; tax rate changes or exposure to additional income tax liability; stock market and currency fluctuations; war, natural disasters, civil or political unrest or terrorism; and unanticipated deterioration of economic and financial conditions in the United States and around the world. Eaton does not assume any obligation to update these forward-looking statements.