
Overview
Etsy operates two-sided online marketplaces that connect millions of passionate and creative buyers and sellers around the world. These marketplaces - which collectively create a “House of Brands” - share our mission, common levers for growth, similar business models, and a strong commitment to use business and technology to strengthen communities and empower people.Our primary marketplace, Etsy.com, is the global destination for unique and creative goods made by independent sellers. The Etsy marketplace connects creative artisans and entrepreneurs with thoughtful consumers looking for items that are a joyful expression of their taste and values. Our sellers are the heart and soul of Etsy, and our technology platform allows our sellers to turn their creative passions into economic opportunity. We have a seller-aligned business model: we make money when our sellers make money. We offer Etsy.com sellers a marketplace with tens of millions of buyers along with a range of seller tools and services that are specifically designed to help our creative entrepreneurs generate more sales and scale their businesses.Buyers come to the Etsy marketplace for meaningful, one-of-a-kind items handcrafted and curated with passion and expertise by our creative entrepreneurs. We are focused on attracting potential buyers to Etsy for everyday items that have meaning and those “special” purchase occasions that happen throughout the year. These include items that reflect an individual’s unique style; gifting that demonstrates thought and care; and celebrations that express creativity and fun.
In addition to our core Etsy marketplace, our “House of Brands” consists of Reverb Holdings, Inc. (“Reverb”), our musical instrument marketplace, Depop Limited (“Depop”), our fashion resale marketplace, and Elo7 Serviços de Informática S.A. (“Elo7”), our Brazil-based marketplace for handmade and unique items. Each of our marketplaces primarily operate independently, although some of our key operational functions such as finance, legal, and human resources, for example, support all four marketplaces to some extent. Our goal is that all four marketplaces benefit from shared expertise in product, marketing, technology, and customer support, and that the sum of the whole, over time, will equal more than its individual parts.We generate revenue primarily from marketplace activities, including transaction, listing, and payments processing fees, and optional services, which include on-site advertising and shipping labels.Our strategy is focused around:•Building a sustainable competitive advantage - our “Right to Win;”•Growing the Etsy marketplace in our seven core geographies; and•Leveraging our marketplace expertise and playbook across our “House of Brands.”
Our investments in technology infrastructure, product development, marketing, trust and safety, member support, sellers’ tools and education, and other areas support our strategy, which you can read more about in our Annual Report.
As of March 31, 2023, our marketplaces connected 7.9 million active sellers and 95.5 million active buyers in nearly every country in the world. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, sellers generated GMS of $3.1 billion, approximately 67% of which came from purchases made on mobile devices. We are a global company and approximately 45% of our GMS in the three months ended March 31, 2023 came from transactions in which either a seller or a buyer or both was located outside of the United States. Total revenue was $640.9 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, driven by growth in both Marketplace and Services revenue. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, we recorded net income of $74.5 million and non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA of $170.3 million. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $1.0 billion as of March 31, 2023. As of March 31, 2023, we had outstanding $1.0 billion aggregate principal amount of 0.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2028 (the “2021 Notes”), $650.0 million aggregate principal amount of 0.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2027 (the “2020 Notes”), and $649.9 million aggregate principal amount of 0.125% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 (the “2019 Notes” and together with the 2021 Notes, 2020 Notes, the “Notes”). Additionally, we have the ability to draw down on our $400.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. For further details, refer to 2023 Credit Agreement below. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, we had positive operating cash flows of $55.6 million.
The 2018 capped call transactions matured on March 1, 2023, and in accordance with the settlement terms, we received 1,194,006 shares of our common stock from the counterparties to the capped call instruments. These shares were retired upon receipt.
On March 24, 2023, we entered into a $400.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility pursuant to an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “2023 Credit Agreement”) among us, as borrower, certain subsidiaries of Etsy party as guarantors, the lenders, and JPMorgan Chase Bank N.A., as administrative Agent. The 2023 Credit Agreement will mature in March 2028 and includes a letter of credit sublimit of $60.0 million and a swingline loan sublimit of $20.0 million. The 2023 Credit Agreement amends and restates in its entirety the Credit Agreement dated as of February 25, 2019, between us, as borrower, the lenders party thereto from time to time, and Citibank N.A., as administrative Agent.  Key Operating and Financial Metrics We collect and analyze operating and financial data to evaluate the health and performance of our business and allocate our resources (such as capital, people, and technology investments). We are providing Etsy marketplace standalone information in certain instances where particularly relevant. The unaudited GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures and key operating metrics we use are:
(1)Consolidated GMS for the three months ended March 31, 2023 includes Etsy marketplace GMS of $2.7 billion. Percent GMS ex-U.S. domestic for the Etsy marketplace for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was 46%. (2)Consolidated active sellers and active buyers includes Etsy marketplace active sellers and active buyers of 5.9 million and 89.9 million, respectively, as of March 31, 2023.(3)See “Mobile GMS” and “GMS ex-U.S. domestic” definitions below.
Gross merchandise sales (“GMS”) is the dollar value of items sold in our marketplaces, excluding shipping fees and net of refunds, within the applicable period. To provide consistency with our calculation of GMS, beginning in the first quarter of 2023, we are also reporting our mobile GMS, GMS ex-U.S. domestic, and Non-U.S. domestic GMS as a percentage of GMS net of refunds. We did not retroactively apply this change to prior periods as the impact was immaterial to such periods. GMS does not represent revenue earned by us. GMS is largely driven by transactions in our marketplaces and is not directly impacted by Services activity. However, because our revenue and cost of revenue depend significantly on the dollar value of items sold in our marketplace, we believe that GMS is an indicator of the success of our sellers, the satisfaction of our buyers, and the health, scale, and growth of our business. We track “Paid GMS” for the Etsy marketplace and define it as Etsy marketplace GMS that is attributable to our performance marketing efforts, which excludes most of our marketing investments focused on brand awareness like TV and digital video.GMS decreased $151.0 million to $3.1 billion in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decline in GMS between the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was primarily driven by a decrease in GMS for the Etsy marketplace. First quarter 2023 GMS was impacted by consumer wallet share shifts from goods to services, softness in some of our top categories such as home and living and craft supplies, and pressures on consumer discretionary spending. While GMS per active buyer on a trailing twelve month basis was down year-over-year given the strong prior year comparisons, the effect was partially offset by the Etsy marketplace ending the first quarter of 2023 with 89.9 million active buyers, up slightly year-over-year for the first time since the fourth quarter of 2021. Additionally, on a consolidated basis we experienced the following (decline)/growth in new buyer and existing buyer GMS in the periods presented:
(1)While new buyer GMS was down 7% year-over-year in the three months ended March 31, 2023, the number of Etsy marketplace new buyers we acquired in the three months ended March 31, 2023 remains meaningfully elevated when compared to pre-pandemic levels.There continues to be significant global macroeconomic and geopolitical uncertainty, which may impact the performance of our business. See Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” for further detail.
Adjusted EBITDA represents our net income adjusted to exclude: interest and other non-operating (income) expense, net; provision (benefit) for income taxes; depreciation and amortization; stock-based compensation expense; foreign exchange loss (gain); and acquisition-related expenses. Adjusted EBITDA margin is Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
An active seller is a seller who has had a charge or sale in the last 12 months. Charges include Marketplace and Services revenue fees, discussed in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Overview—Business.” A seller is separately identified in each of our marketplaces by a unique e-mail address; a single person can have multiple seller accounts and can count as a distinct active seller in each of our marketplaces. We succeed when sellers succeed, so we view the number of active sellers as a key indicator of consumer awareness of our brands, the reach of our platforms, the potential for growth in GMS and revenue, and the health of our business.
An active buyer is a buyer who has made at least one purchase in the last 12 months. A buyer is separately identified in each of our marketplaces by a unique e-mail address; a single person can have multiple buyer accounts and can count as a distinct active buyer in each of our marketplaces. We generate revenue when buyers order items from sellers, so we view the number of active buyers as a key indicator of our potential for growth in GMS and revenue, the reach of our platforms, consumer awareness of our brands, the engagement and loyalty of buyers, and the health of our business.
Mobile GMS is GMS that results from an order completed on a mobile device, such as a tablet or a smartphone. Mobile GMS excludes orders initiated on mobile devices but ultimately completed on a desktop. As noted above in our discussion of “GMS,” beginning in the first quarter of 2023, mobile GMS is now calculated net of refunds. We believe that mobile GMS indicates our success in converting mobile activity into mobile purchases and demonstrates our ability to grow GMS and revenue.During the three months ended March 31, 2023, mobile GMS increased as a percentage of total GMS to approximately 67%, up from approximately 66% for the three months ended March 31, 2022.
GMS ex-U.S. domestic (formerly referred to as Non-U.S. GMS and international GMS) is GMS from transactions in which either (1) the billing address for the seller or (2) the shipping address for the buyer is outside of the United States. GMS ex-U.S. domestic represents all GMS other than GMS from transactions in which the billing address for the seller and the shipping address for the buyer are both in the United States, which we refer to as U.S. Domestic GMS. As noted above in “GMS,” beginning in the first quarter of 2023, GMS ex-U.S. domestic is calculated net of refunds. We believe that GMS ex-U.S. domestic shows the level of engagement of our community outside the United States and demonstrates our ability to grow GMS and revenue.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, GMS ex-U.S. domestic as a percentage of total GMS was approximately 45%, compared to approximately 44% for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Additionally, we experienced the following (decline)/growth in GMS ex-U.S. domestic and non-U.S. domestic GMS on an as reported and currency-neutral basis for the period presented below:
(1)Non-U.S. domestic GMS is GMS generated between a non-U.S. buyer and a non-U.S. seller in the same country. As noted above in “GMS,” beginning in the first quarter of 2023, Non-U.S. domestic GMS is calculated net of refunds.The decline in as reported GMS ex-U.S. domestic for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily driven by the decline in non-U.S. domestic GMS, principally in the United Kingdom, and partially offset by growth in GMS transactions generated between a non-U.S. buyer and a non-U.S. seller in different countries. Additionally, it was negatively impacted by unfavorable exchange rates.
We calculate currency-neutral GMS growth by translating current period GMS for goods sold that were listed in non-U.S. dollar currencies into U.S. dollars using prior year foreign currency exchange rates.As reported and currency-neutral GMS (decline) / growth for the periods presented below are as follows:
Results of Operations The following tables show our results of operations for the periods presented and express the relationship of line items as a percentage of revenue for those periods. The period-to-period comparison of historical financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results. For more information regarding the components of our results of operations, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Components of Our Results of Operations” in the Annual Report, which we incorporate by reference.
Revenue increased $61.6 million to $640.9 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, of which 72.9% consisted of Marketplace revenue and 27.1% consisted of Services revenue.Marketplace revenue increased $39.8 million to $467.5 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. This growth was substantially due to the impact of the pricing update to increase our seller transaction fee for the Etsy marketplace from 5% to 6.5% beginning on April 11, 2022. This increase was partially offset by volume of GMS which decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to March 31, 2022, and was primarily driven by a decline in GMS for the Etsy marketplace. These drivers impacted transaction fee revenue, which increased by 16.5% year-over-year. The share of Etsy marketplace GMS processed through our Etsy Payments platform was 93% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to 92% for the three months ended March 31, 2022.Services revenue increased $21.8 million to $173.4 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The growth in Services revenue was primarily driven by an increase of 17.7% in on-site advertising revenue, which represented a significant majority of the overall Services revenue increase. The increase in advertising revenue was due to higher click volume on Etsy Ads.
Cost of revenue increased $22.5 million to $195.5 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase was partially driven by employee compensation-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, mainly driven by an increase in average headcount. Additionally, cost of revenue increased due to an increase in cloud-related hosting and bandwidth costs, credit card chargebacks, costs of refunds made to buyers that we are not able to collect from sellers, and payments processing fees, which vary with revenue.
Marketing expenses increased $17.0 million to $171.3 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to increased Etsy marketplace digital marketing costs, as we continued to invest in efficient channels and regions with positive return on investment, and to a lesser extent, in non-digital marketing costs, due to an increase in marketing expenses related to the production of new creative for our Etsy marketplace TV ads in North America and the U.K. Paid GMS was 21% of overall GMS for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to 18% for the three months ended March 31, 2022.
Product development expenses increased $26.4 million to $115.9 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to increased employee compensation-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, mainly driven by an increase in average headcount and the issuance of equity awards as part of our compensation strategy.
General and administrative expenses increased $1.8 million to $80.0 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to increased employee compensation-related expenses, including stock-based compensation, mainly driven by an increase in average headcount and partially offset by a decrease in Depop deferred consideration expense. This increase was also partially offset by net favorable impacts of non-income tax items.
Other income, net was $3.1 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, which increased $1.4 million from other income, net of $1.7 million in the three months ended March 31, 2022. This increase was primarily driven by an increase in interest and other income. This increase was partially offset by less favorable changes in U.S. dollar, Euro, Pound Sterling, and Canadian dollar exchange rates in the current year versus the prior year which impact our intercompany and other non-functional currency cash balances.
Our income tax provision and benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $6.7 million and $0.1 million, respectively. The primary drivers of our income tax provision for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were tax expense on income before income taxes, partially offset by a benefit related to research and development tax credits.The primary drivers of our income tax benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2022 were tax benefits from employee stock-based compensation of $10.4 million, partially offset by tax expense on income before income taxes.Non-GAAP Financial Measures The following table reflects the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA and the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA margin for each of the periods indicated:
Liquidity and Capital ResourcesCash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $1.0 billion as of March 31, 2023. Additionally, we have $57.0 million in long-term investments that we can liquidate at short notice and with minimal penalties if needed. We also have the ability to draw down on our $400.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, we had positive operating cash flows of $55.6 million. We believe that this capital structure, as well as the nature and framework of our business, will allow us to meet all debt covenants, sustain our business operations, and be able to react to changing macroeconomic conditions.The following table shows our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, long-term investments, and net working capital as of the date indicated:
As of March 31, 2023, a majority of our cash and cash equivalents, which were primarily held in cash deposits and money market funds, were held in the United States for future investments, working capital funding, and general corporate purposes. We fund our non-U.S. operations from our funds held in the United States on an as-needed basis.We typically invest in short- and long-term instruments, including fixed-income funds and U.S. Government securities aligned with our investment strategy. These investments are intended to allow us to preserve our principal, maintain the ability to meet our liquidity needs, deliver positive yields across a balanced portfolio, and continue to provide us with direct fiduciary control. In accordance with our investment policy, all investments, other than investments made through our Impact Investment Fund, have maturities no longer than 37 months, with the average maturity of these investments maintained at 12 months or less.
As of March 31, 2023, we had three outstanding series of convertible senior notes, and collectively the net carrying value is $2.3 billion. Based on the terms of the Notes, we have the option to pay or deliver cash, shares of our common stock, or a combination thereof, when a conversion notice is received. Based on the daily closing prices of our stock during the quarter ended March 31, 2023, holders of the 2021 Notes, 2020 Notes, and remaining 2019 Notes are not eligible to convert their Notes during the second quarter of 2023.We also have the ability to draw down on a $400.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility (the “2023 Credit Agreement”). At March 31, 2023, we did not have any borrowings under the 2023 Credit Agreement.See Part I, Item 1, “Note 7—Debt” for more information on the Notes and the 2023 Credit Agreement.We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments, together with cash generated from operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs for at least the next 12 months. While this belief is based on our current expectations and assumptions in light of current macroeconomic conditions, our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those described in Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this Quarterly Report.
Our cash flows from operations are largely dependent on the amount of revenue generated on our platforms, as well as associated cost of revenue and other operating expenses. Our primary source of cash from operating activities is cash collections from our customers. Net cash provided by operating activities in each period presented has been influenced by changes in working capital.Net cash provided by operating activities was $55.6 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by cash net income of $165.9 million as a result of revenue generated on our platforms, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities that used $110.3 million in cash, primarily driven by timing of payment of accrued expenses in the period.Net cash provided by operating activities was $59.5 million in the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily driven by cash net income of $150.5 million as a result of revenue generated on our platforms, and changes in our operating assets and liabilities that used $90.9 million in cash, primarily driven by timing of payment of accrued expenses in the period.
Our primary investing activities consist of purchases and sales and maturities of short- and long-term investments and capital expenditures, including investments in capitalized website development and internal-use software and purchases of property and equipment to support our overall business growth. Net cash used in investing activities was $36.1 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023. This was primarily attributable to net purchases of investments of $27.9 million, and to a lesser extent, $8.2 million in capital expenditures, including $6.0 million for website development and internal-use software as we continued to invest in projects adding new features and functionality to our platforms.Net cash used in investing activities was $10.2 million in the three months ended March 31, 2022. This was primarily attributable to $9.2 million in capital expenditures, including $6.0 million for website development and internal-use software.
Our primary financing activities include repurchases of common stock, payment of tax obligations on vested equity awards, proceeds from exercise of stock options, payments of debt issuance costs, payments on finance lease obligations, and settlement of convertible senior notes.Net cash used in financing activities was $158.5 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023. This was primarily attributable to stock repurchases of $148.2 million, and to a lesser extent, payment of tax obligations on vested equity awards of $9.2 million.Net cash used in financing activities was $72.3 million in the three months ended March 31, 2022. This was primarily attributable to stock repurchases of $62.6 million, and to a lesser extent, payment of tax obligations on vested equity awards of $12.3 million.Critical Accounting Policies and EstimatesOur management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our condensed consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these condensed consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, equity, revenue, expenses, and related disclosures. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We continue to monitor the effects of global macroeconomic and geopolitical factors on our results of operations, cash flows, and financial position. We believe we have used reasonable estimates and assumptions in preparing the condensed consolidated financial statements. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.There have been no significant changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates included in our Annual Report.