
We are the global leader in patient-focused medical innovations for structural heart disease and critical care monitoring. Driven by a passion to help patients, we partner with the world's leading clinicians and researchers and invest in research and development to transform care for those impacted by structural heart disease or who require hemodynamic monitoring during surgery or in intensive care.  We conduct operations worldwide and are managed in the following geographical regions: United States, Europe, Japan, and Rest of World. Our products are categorized into the following areas: Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement ("TAVR"), Transcatheter Mitral and Tricuspid Therapies ("TMTT"), Surgical Structural Heart ("Surgical"), and Critical Care.
The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted, and may further adversely impact, nearly all aspects of our business and markets, including our workforce and the operations of our customers, suppliers, and business partners. Our priority has been to maintain access for patients to our life-saving technologies while providing continuous front-line support to our clinician partners, and protecting the well-being of our employees. Our manufacturing operations have continued to respond to impacts related to COVID-19, and we have been able to supply our technologies around the world. Across the organization, we are proactively managing inventory, assessing alternative logistics options, and closely monitoring the supply of components to address potential supply constraints. During the first quarter of 2022, the Omicron variant had a pronounced impact on hospital capacity, resources, and procedure volumes in January 2022, especially in the United States.  Outside the United States, we experienced a less pronounced year-over-year impact from the pandemic. During the first quarter of 2023, Japan faced lingering COVID headwinds and in Europe there were persistent disruptions related to hospital staffing shortages.  In addition to the impacts described above, the global economy, including the financial and credit markets, has recently experienced extreme volatility and disruptions, including increases to inflation rates, rising interest rates, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, and uncertainty about economic stability. The severity and duration of the impact of these conditions on our business cannot be predicted.  See Item 1A, "Risk Factors," of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 for additional information.
Despite the challenges to our business due to COVID-19 and macroeconomic factors, our net sales for the first three months of 2023 were $1.5 billion, representing an increase of $118.4 million over the first three months of 2022, driven primarily by sales of our TAVR products. Our gross profit increase in the three months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by our sales growth.  Gross profit as a percentage of sales decreased primarily due to the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.  The decrease in our diluted earnings per share in the three months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by an after-tax charge of $30.5 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 related to an intellectual property agreement.
The medical technology industry is highly competitive and continues to evolve. Our success is measured both by the development of innovative products and the value we bring to our stakeholders. We are committed to developing new technologies and providing innovative patient care, and we are committed to defending our intellectual property in support of those developments.  Despite the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, our dedicated field teams have found creative ways to support physicians, our engineers continued to advance innovation, and our colleagues worked diligently to keep our clinical trials on track.In the first three months of 2023, we invested 17.9% of our net sales in research and development. We are dedicated to generating robust clinical, economic, and quality-of-life evidence increasingly expected by patients, clinicians, and payors in the current healthcare environment, with the goal of encouraging the adoption of innovative new medical therapies that demonstrate superior outcomes.
Information on new accounting standards is included in Note 1 to the "Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements."
Net sales outside of the United States include the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.  The impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on net sales is not necessarily indicative of the impact on net income due to the corresponding effect of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations on international manufacturing and operating costs, and our hedging activities.
Net sales of TAVR products increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 driven by:•higher sales of the Edwards SAPIEN platform in 2023, primarily the Edwards SAPIEN 3 Ultra valve in the United States; partially offset by:•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales outside of the United States by $25.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to the weakening of the Euro and the Japanese yen against the United States dollar.During the first three months of 2023, we continued to enroll our PROGRESS pivotal trial, studying moderate aortic stenosis patients.  In March 2023, we launched the Edwards SAPIEN 3 Ultra RESILIA valve in Japan.
Net sales of TMTT products increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to continued adoption of our PASCAL system in Europe and the initial launch in the United States.  During the first quarter of 2023, we continued to enroll the CLASP IIF pivotal trial with PASCAL for patients with functional mitral regurgitation.  In mitral replacement, enrollment continued in the ENCIRCLE pivotal trial for SAPIEN M3. In tricuspid, we completed the enrollment of the full cohort of the TRISCEND II pivotal trial of the EVOQUE replacement system.  In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration approved expanded access allowing hospitals that were involved in the clinical trial to continue to have EVOQUE as a therapy option.  In addition, enrollment continued in the CLASP IITR pivotal trial with the PASCAL repair system in patients with symptomatic, severe tricuspid regurgitation.
Net sales of Surgical products increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to increased sales of the INSPIRIS RESILIA aortic valve, primarily in the United States and Europe, and the MITRIS RESILIA valve, primarily in the United States.  These increases were partially offset by the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales outside of the United States by $8.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to the weakening of the Japanese yen and the Euro against the United States dollar.  In early 2023, we began enrolling patients in our MOMENTIS clinical study to demonstrate the durability of RESILIA tissue in the mitral position.
Net sales of Critical Care products increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to:•increased demand for our enhanced surgical recovery products and pressure monitoring products, primarily in the United States; partially offset by:•foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, which decreased net sales outside of the United States by $8.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to the weakening of the Japanese yen and the Euro against the United States dollar.
The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by a 0.7 percentage point decrease from the impact of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, primarily the strengthening of the United States dollar against the Euro and the Japanese yen.
SG&A expenses increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to higher field-based personnel-related costs, primarily TAVR and TMTT in the United States.  Foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations decreased expenses by $8.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to the strengthening of the United States dollar against the Euro and the Japanese yen.
R&D expenses increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to continued investments in our transcatheter aortic valve innovations, including increased clinical trial activity.
We incurred intellectual property agreement and litigation expenses of $43.5 million and $7.1 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. On April 12, 2023, we entered into a Intellectual Property Agreement with Medtronic, Inc. and recorded a $37.0 million charge during the three months ended March 31, 2023.  For more information, see Note 3 to the "Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements."
The change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities resulted in expense of $0.7 million and a gain of $2.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.  The changes in fair value were due to changes in interest rates and the accretion of interest due to the passage of time. For further information, see Note 7 to the "Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements."
The net foreign exchange (gains) losses relate to the foreign currency fluctuations primarily in our global trade and intercompany receivable and payable balances, partially offset by the gains and losses on foreign currency derivative instruments.The (gain) loss on investments primarily represents our net share of gains and losses in investments accounted for under the equity method, and realized gains and losses on investments in equity securities.
The provision for income taxes consists of provisions for federal, state, and foreign income taxes. We operate in an international environment with significant operations in various locations outside the United States which have statutory tax rates typically lower than the United States tax rate. Accordingly, the consolidated income tax rate is a composite rate reflecting the earnings in the various locations and the applicable rates. Our effective income tax rate was 14.6% and 14.3% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.  The increase in the effective rate between the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was primarily due to a reduced tax benefit from employee share-based compensation.  In addition, the effective rates for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were lower than the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to (1) foreign earnings taxed at lower rates, (2) Federal and California research and development credits, and (3) the tax benefit from employee share-based compensation.  In the normal course of business, the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”) and other taxing authorities are in different stages of examining various years of our tax filings.  During these audits we may receive proposed audit adjustments that could be material.  Therefore, there is a possibility that an adverse outcome in these audits could have a material effect on our results of operations and financial condition.  We strive to resolve open matters with each tax authority at the examination level and could reach agreement with a tax authority at any time.  While we have accrued for matters we believe are more likely than not to require settlement, the eventual outcome with a tax authority may result in a tax liability that is more or less than that reflected in the consolidated condensed financial statements.  Furthermore, we may later decide to challenge any assessments, if made, and may exercise our right to appeal. The uncertain tax positions are reviewed quarterly and adjusted as events occur that affect potential liabilities for additional taxes, such as lapsing of applicable statutes of limitations, proposed assessments by tax authorities, negotiations between tax authorities, identification of new issues, and issuance of new legislation, regulations, or case law.We executed an Advance Pricing Agreement ("APA") in 2018 between the United States and Switzerland governments for tax years 2009 through 2020 covering various, but not all, transfer pricing matters.  The unagreed transfer pricing matters, namely Surgical Structural Heart and Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement (collectively "Surgical/TAVR") intercompany royalty transactions, then reverted to IRS Examination for further consideration as part of the respective years' regular tax audits. In addition, we executed other bilateral APAs as follows: during 2017, an APA between the United States and Japan covering tax years 2015 through 2019; and during 2018, APAs between Japan and Singapore and between Switzerland and Japan covering tax years 2015 through 2019. We have filed to renew all the APAs which cover transactions with Japan for the years 2020 and forward.  An APA between Switzerland and Japan covering tax years 2020 through 2024 was executed in 2021.  The execution of some or all these APA renewals depends on many variables outside of our control. The audits of our United States federal income tax returns through 2014 have been closed.  The IRS audit field work for the 2015 through 2017 tax years was completed during the second quarter of 2021, except for certain transfer pricing and related matters.  The IRS began its examination of the 2018 through 2020 tax years during the first quarter of 2022.The audits of our material state, local, and foreign income tax matters have been concluded for years through 2015.  While not material, we continue to address matters in India for years from 2010.  The audits of our United States federal income tax returns through 2014 have been closed.  The IRS audit field work for the 2015 through 2017 tax years was completed during the urth quarter of 2020, except for certain transfer pricing and related matters.  The IRS began its examination of the 2018 through 2020 tax years during the first quarter of 2022.During 2021, we received a Notice of Proposed Adjustment (“NOPA”) from the IRS for the 2015-2017 tax years relating to transfer pricing involving certain Surgical/TAVR intercompany royalty transactions between our United States and Switzerland subsidiaries.  The NOPA proposes an increase to our United States taxable income, which could result in additional tax expense for this period of approximately $210 million and represents a significant change to previously agreed upon transfer pricing methodologies for these types of transactions.  We have formally disagreed with the NOPA and submitted a formal protest on the matter during the fourth quarter of 2021.  During the second quarter of 2022, we received the IRS's rebuttal to our protest and were notified that the case had been transferred to the IRS Independent Office of Appeals ("Appeals"). The opening conference was held with Appeals during the first quarter of 2023 and discussions are ongoing.  We continue to evaluate all possible remedies available to us.  We believe the amounts previously accrued related to this uncertain tax position are sufficient and, accordingly, have not accrued any additional amount based on the NOPA received or as a result of the ongoing Appeals.  While no payment of any amount related to the NOPA is required to be made, if at all, until all applicable proceedings have been completed, we made an advance payment of tax in November 2022 to prevent the further accrual of interest on that portion of any potential deficiency. Certain Surgical/TAVR intercompany royalty transactions covering tax years 2018-2022 that were not resolved under the APA program remain subject to IRS examination, and those transactions and related tax positions remain uncertain as of March 31, 2023.  We have considered this information, as well as information regarding the NOPA, the rebuttal and ongoing Appeals described above, in our evaluation of our uncertain tax positions.  The impact of these unresolved transfer pricing matters, net of any correlative repatriation tax adjustment, may be significant to our consolidated condensed financial statements.  Based on the information currently available and numerous possible outcomes, we cannot reasonably estimate what, if any, changes in our existing uncertain tax positions may occur in the next 12 months and, therefore, have continued to record the uncertain tax positions as a long-term liability.On August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 (“IRA”) was signed into law.  The IRA includes, among other provisions, changes to the U.S. corporate income tax system, including a 15% minimum tax based on “adjusted financial statement income,” which is effective for tax years beginning after December 31, 2022, and a one percent excise tax on net repurchases of stock after December 31, 2022.  Based upon our analysis to date, we do not expect the IRA will have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Our sources of cash liquidity include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash from operations, and amounts available under credit facilities. We believe that these sources are sufficient to fund the current and long-term requirements of working capital, capital expenditures, and other financial commitments. However, we periodically consider various financing alternatives and may, from time to time, seek to take advantage of favorable interest rate environments or other market conditions. As of March 31, 2023, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held in the United States and outside of the United States were $902.2 million and $352.0 million, respectively. We have a Five-year Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement") which provides for a $750.0 million multi-currency unsecured revolving credit facility and matures on July 15, 2027.  We may increase the amount available under the Credit Agreement by up to an additional $250.0 million in the aggregate and extend the maturity date for an additional year, subject to agreement of the lenders.  As of March 31, 2023, no amounts were outstanding under the Credit Agreement.  In June 2018, we issued $600.0 million of 4.3% fixed-rate unsecured senior notes (the "2018 Notes") due June 15, 2028.  As of March 31, 2023, the carrying value of the 2018 Notes was $596.5 million. From time to time, we repurchase shares of our common stock under share repurchase programs authorized by the Board of Directors.  We consider several factors in determining when to execute share repurchases, including, among other things, expected dilution from stock plans, cash capacity, and the market price of our common stock. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, under the Board authorized repurchase program, we repurchased a total of 3.2 million shares at an aggregate cost of $249.1 million. See Part II, Item 2, “Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds,” for additional information about our share repurchase program.  As of March 31, 2023, we had remaining authority to purchase $666.5 million of our common stock under the share repurchase program.  On April 12, 2023, we entered into a Intellectual Property Agreement with Medtronic, Inc. ("Medtronic") pursuant to which the parties agreed to a 15-year global covenant not to sue ("CNS") for infringement of certain patents in the structural heart space owned or controlled by each other. In consideration for the global CNS, Edwards will pay to Medtronic a one-time, lump sum payment of $300.0 million and annual royalty payments that are tied to net sales of certain Edwards products.   On February 28, 2023, we acquired a majority equity interest in a medical technology company.  In addition, we amended and restated our previous option agreement with the medical technology company.  The option agreement gives Edwards the option to acquire the remaining equity interest in the medical technology company.  For more information, see Note 6 to the "Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements."At March 31, 2023, there had been no material changes in our cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations, including commitments for capital expenditures, as disclosed in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Net cash flows provided by operating activities of $314.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $20.8 million over the same period last year primarily due to a higher bonus payout in 2022 associated with 2021 performance, partially offset by higher operating costs in 2023.Net cash provided by investing activities of $0.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 consisted primarily of net proceeds from investments of $246.2 million, partially offset by a payment of $141.2 million to acquire a majority interest in another company (see Note 6 to the "Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements") and capital expenditures of $61.5 million.Net cash provided by investing activities of $229.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022 consisted primarily of net proceeds from investments of $299.3 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $72.7 million.Net cash used in financing activities of $206.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $249.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from stock plans of $41.9 million. Net cash used in financing activities of $368.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022 consisted primarily of purchases of treasury stock of $405.6 million, partially offset by proceeds from stock plans of $37.5 million.
The consolidated condensed financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States which require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated condensed financial statements and revenues and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Information with respect to our critical accounting policies and estimates which we believe could have the most significant effect on our reported results and require subjective or complex judgments by management is contained on pages 34-36 in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations," of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. There have been no significant changes from the information discussed therein.