
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our unaudited “Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements” and the “Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements (unaudited)” appearing elsewhere in this report and the “Consolidated Financial Statements,” “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contained in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. We make statements in this section that are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. For a complete discussion of forward-looking statements, see the section in this Form 10-Q entitled “Statement on Forward-Looking Information.”
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our notes to the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report and the audited financial statements contained in our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 describe the significant accounting policies essential to our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements. Preparation of our financial statements requires estimates, judgments and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments and assumptions that we have used are appropriate and correct based on information available at the time they were made. These estimates, judgments and assumptions can affect our reported assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the period presented. If there are material differences between these estimates, judgments and assumptions and actual facts, our financial statements may be affected.In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by GAAP and does not require our judgment in its application. There are areas in which our judgment in selecting among available alternatives would not produce a materially different result, but there are some areas in which our judgment in selecting among available alternatives would produce a materially different result. See the notes to the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements that contain additional information regarding our accounting policies and other disclosures.
We are a fully integrated, self-administered and self-managed real estate investment trust (“REIT”), formed to own, operate, manage, acquire, develop and redevelop self-storage properties (“stores”). We derive substantially all of our revenues from our two segments: storage operations and tenant reinsurance.  Primary sources of revenue for our storage operations segment include rents received from tenants under leases at each of our wholly-owned stores.  Our operating results depend materially on our ability to lease available self-storage units, to actively manage unit rental rates, and on the ability of our tenants to make required rental payments. Consequently, management spends a significant portion of their time maximizing cash flows from our diverse portfolio of stores.  Revenue from our tenant reinsurance segment consists of insurance revenues from the reinsurance of risks relating to the loss of goods stored by tenants in our stores. Our stores are generally situated in highly visible locations clustered around large population centers.  These areas typically enjoy above average population growth and income levels. The clustering of our assets around these population centers enables us to reduce our operating costs through economies of scale.  To maximize the performance of our stores, we employ industry-leading revenue management systems.  Developed internally, these systems enable us to analyze, set and adjust rental rates in real time across our portfolio in order to respond to changing market conditions. We believe our systems and processes allow us to more pro-actively manage revenues.We operate in competitive markets, often where consumers have multiple stores from which to choose. Competition has impacted, and will continue to impact, our store results. We experience seasonal fluctuations in occupancy levels, with occupancy levels generally higher in the summer months due to increased moving activity.  We believe that we are able to respond quickly and effectively to changes in local, regional and national economic conditions by adjusting rental rates through the combination of our revenue management team and our proprietary pricing systems.  We consider a store to be in the lease-up stage after it has been issued a certificate of occupancy, but before it has achieved stabilization. We consider a store to be stabilized once it has achieved either an 80% occupancy rate for a full year measured as of January 1 of the current year, or has been open for three years prior to January 1 of the current year.On April 3, 2023, we entered into a definitive merger agreement for an all-stock transaction with Life Storage, Inc. (“Life Storage”), Life Storage LP (the “Operating Partnership”), Extra Space Storage LP (“Extra Space OP”), Eros Merger Sub, LLC ("Eros Merger Sub”) and Eros OP Merger Sub, LLC (“Eros OP Merger Sub”), pursuant to which Eros Merger Sub will merge with and into Life Storage (the “company merger”), with Life Storage surviving the company merger as our wholly owned subsidiary and (b) following certain conversion and contributions transactions, Eros OP Merger Sub will merge with and into the Operating Partnership (the “partnership merger” and together with the company merger, the “mergers”), with the Operating Partnership surviving the partnership merger and becoming a wholly owned subsidiary of Extra Space OP. Under the terms of the merger agreement, Life Storage stockholders will receive 0.895 of an Extra Space common share for each Life Storage share they own for estimated total consideration of $12.7 billion, based on Life Storage's closing share price on March 31, 2023. The combined company will own and/or manage over 3,500 locations and over 264.0 million net rentable square feet. The transaction is currently expected to close in the second half of 2023, subject to the approval of our stockholders and Life Storage stockholders and satisfaction of other customary closing conditions.
As of March 31, 2023, we owned or had ownership interests in 1,457 operating stores.  Of these stores, 1,133 are wholly-owned, and 323 are in unconsolidated joint ventures.  In addition, we managed an additional 931 stores for third parties bringing the total number of stores which we own and/or manage to 2,388.  These stores are located in 41 states and Washington, D.C.  The majority of our stores are clustered around large population centers.  The clustering of assets around these population centers enables us to reduce our operating costs through economies of scale.  Our acquisitions have given us an increased scale in many core markets as well as a foothold in many markets where we had no previous presence.As of March 31, 2023, approximately 1,380,000 tenants were leasing storage units at the operating stores that we own and/or manage, primarily on a month-to-month basis, providing the flexibility to increase rental rates over time as market conditions permit. Existing tenants generally receive rate increases at least annually, for which no direct correlation has been drawn to our vacancy trends. Although leases are short-term in duration, the typical tenant tends to remain at our stores for an extended period of time. For stores that were stabilized as of March 31, 2023, the average length of stay was approximately 16.6 months.The average annual rent per square foot for our existing customers at stabilized stores, net of discounts and bad debt, was $21.05 for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $19.47 for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  Average annual rent per square foot for new leases was $17.00 for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $19.23 for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The average discounts, as a percentage of rental revenues, at all stabilized properties during these periods were 2.4% and 3.0%, respectively.Our store portfolio is made up of different types of construction and building configurations. Most often sites are what we consider “hybrid” stores, a mix of drive-up and multi-floor buildings. We have a number of multi-floor buildings with elevator access only, and a number of stores featuring ground-floor access only.The following table presents additional information regarding net rentable square feet and the number of stores by state.
(1)    Excludes 17,000 units related to the Bargold transaction. See Note 7 in the Notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Results for the three months ended March 31, 2023 included the operations of 1,457 stores (1,133 wholly-owned, one in a consolidated joint venture, and 323 in joint ventures accounted for using the equity method) compared to the results for the three months ended March 31, 2022, which included the operations of 1,283 stores (995 wholly-owned, zero in consolidated joint ventures, and 288 in joint ventures accounted for using the equity method).
The following table presents information on revenues earned for the periods indicated:
Property Rental—The increase in property rental revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily the result of an increase of $26,692 at our stabilized stores related primarily to higher average rates to existing customers.  Property rental revenue also increased by $21,109 associated with acquisitions completed in 2023 and 2022.  We acquired one wholly-owned store during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and a total of 153 stores during the year ended December 31, 2022.  Tenant Reinsurance—The increase in our tenant reinsurance revenues was due primarily to an increase in the number of stores operated. We operated 2,388 stores at March 31, 2023 compared to 2,130 stores at March 31, 2022.Management Fees and Other Income—Management fees and other income primarily represent the fees collected for our management of stores owned by third parties and unconsolidated joint ventures and other transaction fee income.  The increase for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was due to both an increase in the number of stores managed and an increase in the overall revenue of stores under management when compared to the same period last year.  As of March 31, 2023, we managed 1,255 stores for joint ventures and third parties, compared to 1,135 stores as of March 31, 2022.
The following table presents information on expenses for the periods indicated:
Property Operations—The increase in property operations expense during the three months ended March 31, 2023 consists primarily of an increase of $7,006 related to acquisitions completed in 2023 and 2022. We acquired one wholly-owned store during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and a total of 153 stores during the year ended December 31, 2022. Additionally, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 there was an increase of $4,394 at our stabilized stores primarily due to payroll, marketing, credit card processing fees, utilities and insurance, partially offset by repairs and maintenance and property taxes.Tenant Reinsurance—Tenant reinsurance expense represents the costs that are incurred to provide tenant reinsurance.  We operated 2,388 stores at March 31, 2023 compared to 2,130 stores at March 31, 2022.General and Administrative—General and administrative expenses primarily include all expenses not directly related to our stores, including corporate payroll, office expense, office rent, travel and professional fees. Payroll has continued to increase as a result of outsized inflation. We did not observe any material trends in specific travel or other expenses apart from inflationary pressures and from the increase due to the management of additional stores. Also, during the three months ended March 31, 2023 increases relate in part to the acquisition of Bargold in June 2022 and 106 stores added with the Storage Express acquisition in September 2022 compared to the same period last year.Depreciation and Amortization—Depreciation and amortization expense increased as a result of the acquisition of new stores. We acquired one wholly-owned store during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and a total of 153 stores during the year ended December 31, 2022.
The following table presents information about other revenues and expenses for the periods indicated:
Interest Expense—The increase in interest expense during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily the result of a higher weighted average interest rate and debt balance compared to the same period in the prior year.Interest Income—Interest income represents interest earned on bridge loans, notes receivable and debt securities and income earned on notes receivable from Common and Preferred Operating Partnership unit holders.  The increase in interest income during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily the result of an increase in the notes receivable for our bridge loan program along with an increase in interest rates. Equity in Earnings and Dividend Income from Unconsolidated Real Estate Entities—Equity in earnings of unconsolidated real estate entities represents the income earned through our ownership interests in unconsolidated joint ventures. In these joint ventures, we and our joint venture partners generally receive a preferred return on our invested capital. To the extent that cash or profits in excess of these preferred returns are generated, we receive a higher percentage of the excess cash or profits.  Dividend income represents dividends from our $200,000 investment in preferred stock of SmartStop.  Income Tax Expense—The increase in income tax expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily the result of an increase in book income and a decrease in permanent tax deductions related to stock awards.
Funds from operations (“FFO”) provides relevant and meaningful information about our operating performance that is necessary, along with net income and cash flows, for an understanding of our operating results. We believe FFO is a meaningful disclosure as a supplement to net earnings. Net earnings assume that the values of real estate assets diminish predictably over time as reflected through depreciation and amortization expenses. The values of real estate assets fluctuate due to market conditions and we believe FFO more accurately reflects the value of our real estate assets. FFO is defined by the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts, Inc. (“NAREIT”) as net income computed in accordance with GAAP, excluding gains or losses on sales of operating stores and impairment write downs of depreciable real estate assets, plus real estate related depreciation and amortization and after adjustments to record unconsolidated partnerships and joint ventures on the same basis. We believe that to further understand our performance, FFO should be considered along with the reported net income and cash flows in accordance with GAAP, as presented in our condensed consolidated financial statements.  FFO should not be considered a replacement of net income computed in accordance with GAAP.The computation of FFO may not be comparable to FFO reported by other REITs or real estate companies that do not define the term in accordance with the current NAREIT definition or that interpret the current NAREIT definition differently. FFO does not represent cash generated from operating activities determined in accordance with GAAP, and should not be considered as an alternative to net income as an indication of our performance, as an alternative to net cash flow from operating activities, as a measure of our liquidity, or as an indicator of our ability to make cash distributions.The following table presents the calculation of FFO for the periods indicated:
Our same-store pool for the periods presented consists of 914 stores that are wholly-owned and operated and that were stabilized by the first day of the earliest calendar year presented. We consider a store to be stabilized once it has been open for three years or has sustained average square foot occupancy of 80% or more for one calendar year.  We believe that by providing same-store results from a stabilized pool of stores, with accompanying operating metrics including, but not limited to: occupancy, rental revenue growth, operating expense growth, net operating income growth, etc., stockholders and potential investors are able to evaluate operating performance without the effects of non-stabilized occupancy levels, rent levels, expense levels, acquisitions or completed developments.  Same-store results should not be used as a basis for future same-store performance or for the performance of our stores as a whole.  The following table presents operating data for our same-store portfolio.
Same-store revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the same period in 2022 due to higher average rates to existing customers and higher other operating income partially offset by lower occupancy.  Same-store expenses increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022 due to increases in payroll, marketing, credit card processing fees, utilities and insurance, partially offset by saving in repairs and maintenance and property taxes.
The following table presents a reconciliation of same-store net operating income to net income as presented on our condensed consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated:
Cash flows from operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased when compared to the same period in the prior year.  Cash flows used in investing activities relates primarily to our acquisition and development of REIT and joint venture assets, as well as activity on our bridge loan program.  Cash flows from financing activities depend primarily on our debt and equity financing activities.  A summary of cash flows along with significant components are as follows:
We believe that cash flows generated by operations, along with our existing cash and cash equivalents, the availability of funds under our existing lines of credit, and our access to capital markets will be sufficient to meet all of our reasonably anticipated cash needs during the next 12 months.  These cash needs include operating expenses, monthly debt service payments, recurring capital expenditures, acquisitions, redevelopments and expansions, distributions to unit holders and dividends to stockholders necessary to maintain our REIT qualification.We expect to generate positive cash flow from operations in 2023, and we consider these projected cash flows in our sources and uses of cash. These cash flows are principally derived from rents paid by our tenants. A significant deterioration in projected cash flows from operations could cause us to increase our reliance on available funds under our existing lines of credit, curtail planned capital expenditures, or seek other additional sources of financing.
As of March 31, 2023, we had $47,951 available in cash and cash equivalents. Our cash and cash equivalents are held in accounts managed by third party financial institutions and consist of invested cash and cash in our operating accounts. During 2023 and 2022, we experienced no loss or lack of access to our cash or cash equivalents; however, there can be no assurance that access to our cash and cash equivalents will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets.As of March 31, 2023, we had $7,366,967 face value of debt, resulting in a debt to total enterprise value ratio of 23.9%.  As of March 31, 2023, the ratio of total fixed-rate debt and other instruments to total debt was 70.7% ($5,207,398 total fixed-rate debt including $1,782,610 on which we have interest rate swaps that have been included as fixed-rate debt). The weighted average interest rate of the total of fixed- and variable-rate debt at March 31, 2023 was 4.3%. Certain of our real estate assets are pledged as collateral for our debt. We are subject to certain restrictive covenants relating to our outstanding debt. We were in compliance with all financial covenants at March 31, 2023.We expect to fund our short-term liquidity requirements, including operating expenses, recurring capital expenditures, dividends to stockholders, distributions to holders of Operating Partnership units and interest on our outstanding indebtedness, out of our operating cash flow, cash on hand and borrowings under our revolving lines of credit. In addition, we are pursuing additional sources of financing based on anticipated funding needs and growth assumptions.We currently hold a BBB/Stable rating from S&P and a Baa2 rating from Moody's Investors Service.  We intend to manage our balance sheet to maintain these ratings. Certain of our real estate assets are pledged as collateral for our debt. As of March 31, 2023, we had a total of 906 unencumbered stores as defined by our public bonds. Our unencumbered asset value was calculated as $17,247,796 and our total asset value was calculated as $22,407,701 according to the calculations as defined by our public bonds.Our liquidity needs consist primarily of operating expenses, monthly debt service payments, recurring capital expenditures, dividends to stockholders and distributions to unit holders necessary to maintain our REIT qualification. We may from time to time seek to repurchase our outstanding debt, shares of common stock or other securities in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. In addition, we evaluate, on an ongoing basis, the merits of strategic acquisitions and other relationships, which may require us to raise additional funds. We may also use Operating Partnership units as currency to fund acquisitions from self-storage owners.
Except as disclosed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements of our most recently filed Annual Report on Form 10-K, we do not currently have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purposes entities, which typically are established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. Further, except as disclosed in the notes to our condensed consolidated financial statements, we have not guaranteed any obligations of unconsolidated entities, nor do we have any commitments or intent to provide funding to any such entities. Accordingly, we are not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in these relationships.
The self-storage business is subject to seasonal fluctuations. A greater portion of revenues and profits are realized from May through September. Historically, our highest level of occupancy has been at the end of July, while our lowest level of occupancy has been in late February and early March. Results for any quarter may not be indicative of the results that may be achieved for the full fiscal year.