
FE and its subsidiaries are principally involved in the transmission, distribution and generation of electricity through its reportable segments, Regulated Distribution and Regulated Transmission. FirstEnergy is proceeding with the consolidation of the Pennsylvania Companies into FE PA, a new, single operating entity. The PA Consolidation will require, among other steps: (a) the transfer of certain Pennsylvania-based transmission assets owned by WP to KATCo, (b) the contribution of Class B equity interests of MAIT currently held by PN and ME to FE (and ultimately transferred to FET as part of the FET Minority Equity Interest Sale), (c) the formation of FE PA and (d) the merger of each of the Pennsylvania Companies with and into FE PA, with FE PA surviving such mergers as the successor-in-interest to all assets and liabilities of the Pennsylvania Companies. Following completion of the PA Consolidation, FE PA will be FE’s only regulated utility in Pennsylvania encompassing the operations previously conducted individually by the Pennsylvania Companies and is expected to realize increased regulatory and administrative efficiencies, streamlined operational functions and certain financing benefits. Consummation of the PA Consolidation is contingent upon numerous conditions, including the approval of NYPSC, PPUC and FERC, which filings were submitted on March 6, 2023. Subject to receipt of such regulatory approvals, FirstEnergy expects that the PA Consolidation will close by early 2024.The Regulated Distribution segment distributes electricity through FirstEnergy’s ten utility operating companies, serving approximately six million customers within 65,000 square miles of Ohio, Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Maryland, New Jersey and New York, and purchases power for its provider of last resort, SOS, standard service offer and default service requirements in Ohio, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Maryland. This segment also controls 3,580 MWs of regulated electric generation capacity located primarily in West Virginia and Virginia. The segment’s results reflect the costs of securing and delivering electric generation from transmission facilities to customers, including the deferral and amortization of certain related costs.The Regulated Transmission segment provides transmission infrastructure owned and operated by the Transmission Companies and certain of FirstEnergy’s utilities (JCP&L, MP, PE and WP) to transmit electricity from generation sources to distribution facilities. The segment’s revenues are primarily derived from forward-looking formula rates. Under forward-looking formula rates, the revenue requirement is updated annually based on a projected rate base and projected costs, which is subject to an annual true-up based on actual rate base and costs. The segment’s results also reflect the net transmission expenses related to the delivery of electricity on FirstEnergy’s transmission facilities. On November 6, 2021, FirstEnergy, along with FET, entered into the FET P&SA I, with Brookfield and the Brookfield Guarantors pursuant to which FET agreed to issue and sell to Brookfield at the closing, and Brookfield agreed to purchase from FET, certain newly issued membership interests of FET, such that Brookfield would own 19.9% of the issued and outstanding membership interests of FET, for a purchase price of $2.375 billion. The transaction closed on May 31, 2022.On February 2, 2023, FE, along with FET, entered into the FET P&SA II with Brookfield and the Brookfield Guarantors, pursuant to which FE agreed to sell to Brookfield at the closing, and Brookfield agreed to purchase from FE, an incremental 30% equity interest in FET for a purchase price of $3.5 billion. The purchase price will be payable in part by the issuance of a promissory note expected to be in the principal amount of $1.75 billion. The remaining $1.75 billion of the purchase price will be payable in cash at the closing. As a result of the consummation of the transaction, Brookfield’s interest in FET will increase from 19.9% to 49.9%, while FE will retain the remaining 50.1% ownership interests of FET. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including approval from the FERC and certain state utility commissions, and completion of review by the CFIUS. In addition, pursuant to the FET P&SA II, FirstEnergy has agreed to make the necessary filings with the applicable regulatory authorities for the PA Consolidation. The FET Minority Equity Interest Sale is expected to close by early 2024. Upon closing, FET will continue to be consolidated in FirstEnergy’s GAAP financial statements.Corporate/Other reflects corporate support and other costs not charged or attributable to the Utilities or Transmission Companies, including FE’s retained pension and OPEB assets and liabilities of former subsidiaries, interest expense on FE’s holding company debt and other investments or businesses that do not constitute an operating segment, including FEV’s investment of 33-1/3% equity ownership in Global Holding. Additionally, reconciling adjustments for the elimination of inter-segment transactions are included in Corporate/Other. As of March 31, 2023, 67 MWs of electric generating capacity, representing AE Supply’s OVEC capacity entitlement, was also included in Corporate/Other for segment reporting. As of March 31, 2023, Corporate/Other had approximately $5.7 billion of FE holding company debt.
FirstEnergy is a forward-thinking, electric utility centered on integrity, powered by a diverse team of employees, committed to making customers’ lives brighter, the environment better and our communities stronger.FirstEnergy's core values encompass what matters most to the company. They guide the decisions we make and the actions we take. FirstEnergy's core values should inspire our actions today and shine a light on who we aspire to be in the future.FirstEnergy Core Values:•Integrity: We always act ethically with honesty, humility and accountability.•Safety: We keep ourselves and others safe.•Diversity, Equity and Inclusion: We embrace differences, ensure every employee is treated fairly and create a culture where everyone feels they belong.•Performance Excellence: We pursue excellence and seek opportunities for growth, innovation and continuous improvement.•Stewardship: We positively impact our customers, communities and other stakeholders, and strive to protect the environment.Employees are encouraged and expected to have conversations with their leaders and peers about the core values and FirstEnergy's commitment to building a culture centered on integrity.At FirstEnergy, we are dedicated to staying true to our mission and core values. We understand the impact our company can make in the world around us, which means pursuing initiatives and goals that align with our foundational principles, support our EESG and strategic priorities, and positively impact our stakeholders.To solidify our role as an industry leader, we have developed a long-term strategy with priorities that are centered on our mission statement. These priorities reflect a strong foundation with a customer-centered focus that emphasizes modern experiences, new growth and affordable energy bills, and enables the energy transition to a clean, resilient and secure electric grid.We are proud of the steps we have already taken to demonstrate our commitment to our strategy and look forward to improving our performance and executing on these strategic priorities.As a fully regulated electric utility, FirstEnergy is focused on stable and predictable earnings and cash flow from its Regulated Distribution and Regulated Transmission businesses flowing through investments that deliver enhanced customer service and reliability.FirstEnergy's Regulated Distribution business is comprised of a geographically and regulatory diverse collection of electric utilities delivering customer-focused sustainable growth. This business operates in a territory of 65,000 square miles, across the Midwest & Mid-Atlantic regions, one of the largest contiguous territories in the United States, and allows the Utilities to be uniquely positioned for growth through investments that strengthen the grid and enable the clean energy transition, with more than $9 billion in investment plans (or 53% of the total FirstEnergy investment plan) from 2021 to 2025. Through its investment plan, Regulated Distribution is focused on improving reliability and added operating flexibility to the distribution infrastructure, which provide benefits to the customers and communities those Utilities serve.In addition to our investments to rebuild critical infrastructure and improve reliability, current and future distribution investment opportunities that support our EESG and strategic priorities include:•Advanced Metering Infrastructure – install smart meters and related infrastructure;•Grid Modernization Investments that support distribution automation and voltage and VAR optimization;•Installation of electric vehicle charging stations;•Energy efficiency and demand response initiatives that assist customers in lowering their overall energy bills while also helping us to reduce peak system demand;•Utility-Scale Solar Generation that lowers our carbon footprint;•Pilot program to install battery storage systems;•Information Systems – enhance our core information infrastructure of our distribution systems; and•Supporting economic development to attract new business.FirstEnergy has an active regulatory calendar in 2023 and 2024 to support its regulated growth strategy and address the critical investments that support reliability and a smarter and cleaner electric grid, including:•On January 13, 2023, MP and PE filed a request with the WVPSC seeking approval of new depreciation rates for existing and future capital assets. Specifically, MP and PE are seeking to increase depreciation expense by $75.5 million per year, primarily for regulated generation-related assets;•On March 16, 2023, JCP&L filed a base rate case in New Jersey, which supports investments to strengthen the energy grid, enhance the customer experience, and provide assistance to low-income as well as senior citizen customers. Key proposals to the filing include: a distribution rate base of $3.0 billion, ROE of 10.4%, and a capital structure of debt/equity of 48%/52%. Additionally, JCP&L plans to file an infrastructure investment program by June 2023;•On March 22, 2023, PE filed a base rate case in Maryland, which supports reliability investments through energy grid upgrades, ongoing tree trimming, infrastructure inspections, and low-income assistance programs. Key proposals to the filing include: a distribution rate base of $719 million, ROE of 10.6%, and a capital structure of debt/equity of 46.5%/53.5%;•On April 5, 2023, the Ohio Companies sought approval from the PUCO for its ESP V. The proposed plan would maintain an eight-year term beginning June 1, 2024, and seeks to continue riders recovering costs associated with distribution infrastructure investments and approved grid modernization investments. ESP V additionally proposes new riders that would support reliability, and includes provisions supporting affordability and enhancing the customer experience;•MP and PE expect to file a base rate case in West Virginia in the second quarter of 2023, which will support reliability investments, grid resiliency, an enhanced customer experience, and provide assistance to low-income customers; and•FirstEnergy plans to continue its active regulatory filings in 2024 with base rate case filings in Ohio and potentially Pennsylvania.FirstEnergy's Regulated Transmission business is a premier, high quality transmission business, with approximately 24,000 miles of transmission lines in operation and one of the largest transmission systems in PJM. The Transmission Companies and certain of FirstEnergy's utilities (JCP&L, MP, PE and WP) are focused on "Energizing the Future" with investments that support clean energy, improve grid reliability and resiliency and support a carbon neutral future. "Energizing the Future" is the centerpiece of FirstEnergy’s regulated investment strategy with all investments recovered under FERC-regulated forward-looking formula rates, and approximately $8 billion in investment plans (or 45% of the total FirstEnergy investment plan) from 2021 to 2025. FirstEnergy believes there is a continued long-term pipeline of investment opportunities for its existing transmission infrastructure beyond those identified through 2025, which are expected to strengthen grid and cyber-security and make the transmission system more reliable, robust, secure and resistant to extreme weather events, with improved operational flexibility.In addition to our Energizing the Future investments, current and future transmission investment opportunities that support our EESG and strategic priorities include:•Transmission Asset Health Center: real-time monitoring to reduce outages and lower expenses;•Integrating digital technology to enhance equipment monitoring and lower costs;•JCP&L awarded approximately $723 million of projects to connect clean energy generated by New Jersey's offshore wind farms to the power grid;•Exploring real-time technologies: emerging technologies to enhance data collection; and•Making smart investments to modernize the grid to integrate future renewables.On February 2, 2023, FE, along with FET, entered into the FET P&SA II with Brookfield and the Brookfield Guarantors, pursuant to which FE agreed to sell to Brookfield at the closing, and Brookfield agreed to purchase from FE, an incremental 30% equity interest in FET for a purchase price of $3.5 billion. The purchase price will be payable in part by the issuance of a promissory note expected to be in the principal amount of $1.75 billion. The remaining $1.75 billion of the purchase price will be payable in cash at the closing. As a result of the consummation of the transaction, Brookfield’s interest in FET will increase from 19.9% to 49.9%, while FE will retain the remaining 50.1% ownership interests of FET. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including approval from the FERC and certain state utility commissions, and completion of review by the CFIUS. In addition, pursuant to the FET P&SA II, FirstEnergy has agreed to make the necessary filings with the applicable regulatory authorities for the PA Consolidation. The FET Minority Equity Interest Sale is expected to close by early 2024. Upon closing, FET will continue to be consolidated in FirstEnergy’s GAAP financial statements.FirstEnergy is proceeding with the consolidation of the Pennsylvania Companies into FE PA, a new, single operating entity. The PA Consolidation will require, among other steps: (a) the transfer of certain Pennsylvania-based transmission assets owned by WP to KATCo, (b) the contribution of Class B equity interests of MAIT currently held by PN and ME to FE (and ultimately transferred to FET as part of the FET Minority Equity Interest Sale), (c) the formation of FE PA and (d) the merger of each of the Pennsylvania Companies with and into FE PA, with FE PA surviving such mergers as the successor-in-interest to all assets and liabilities of the Pennsylvania Companies. Following completion of the PA Consolidation, FE PA will be FE’s only regulated utility in Pennsylvania encompassing the operations previously conducted individually by the Pennsylvania Companies. Consummation of the PA Consolidation is contingent upon numerous conditions, including the approval of NYPSC, PPUC and FERC, which filings were submitted on March 6, 2023. Subject to receipt of such regulatory approvals, FirstEnergy expects that the PA Consolidation will close by early 2024. FirstEnergy is also evaluating the legal, financial, operational, and branding benefits of consolidating the Ohio Companies into a single Ohio utility company.FE Forward is our ongoing effort of continuous improvement, including the strategic reduction of operating expenditures and continued reinvestment in a more diverse capital program in support of our long-term strategy. FirstEnergy will leverage other opportunities to reduce costs, such as filling only critical positions, and will explore other additional, sustainable opportunities, such as reducing contractor spend. Additionally, we will begin implementing our facility optimization plans, which focus on both cost savings and alignment with our flexible working arrangements, and will result in our exiting the General Office in Akron, Ohio, and other corporate facilities in Brecksville, Ohio, Greensburg, Pennsylvania, and Morristown, New Jersey beginning in 2024. Our corporate headquarters will remain in Akron, moving to our West Akron Campus, and we continue to explore real estate options and relocation opportunities for the other corporate facilities. As FirstEnergy continues to transform the business and implement initiatives to reduce cost, including the facility optimization plan, the impact of such actions may result in future impairments or other charges that may be significant. The result of our combined efforts will help build a stronger, more sustainable company for the near and long term.On March 27, 2023, FirstEnergy announced that the FE Board had appointed Brian X. Tierney to the position of President and Chief Executive Officer, effective as of June 1, 2023. Mr. Tierney, 55, currently serves as Senior Managing Director and Global Head of Infrastructure Operations and Asset Management at Blackstone. Prior to joining Blackstone in July 2021, Mr. Tierney spent 23 years with AEP. John W. Somerhalder II will cease serving as Interim President and Chief Executive Officer at the conclusion of May 31, 2023, and will continue to serve as the Chair of the FE Board.
Our commitment to climate is a significant component of our company’s overarching strategy, especially our desire to enable the transition to a clean energy future. Executing our Climate Strategy and advancing the transition to clean energy requires addressing, among other things: emerging federal and state decarbonization goals; physical risks of climate change; industry trends and technology advancements; and customer expectations for cleaner energy, increased usage control, and more sustainable alternatives in transportation, manufacturing and industrial processes. Through our investment plan, we aim to enhance the resiliency, reliability and security of the electric system and support the integration of renewables, electric vehicles, grid modernization improvements and other emerging technologies. As part of our Climate Strategy, we have pledged to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, with an interim 30% reduction in GHGs by 2030 based on 2019 levels. This GHG goal addresses company-wide emissions within our direct operational control, also known as Scope 1 emissions, across our transmission, distribution and regulated generation operations.Key steps in working toward carbon neutrality by 2050 include: •Reducing Sulfur Hexafluoride Emissions: We're working to repair or replace, as appropriate, transmission breakers that leak sulfur hexafluoride, which is a gas commonly used by energy companies as an electrical insulating material and arc extinguisher in high-voltage circuit breakers and switchgear. If escaped to the atmosphere, it acts as a potent GHG with a global warming potential significantly greater than CO2;•Electrifying our Vehicle Fleet: We’re targeting 30% electrification of our light-duty and aerial truck fleet by 2030 and 100% electrification by 2050. To reach our electrification goal, we’re striving for 100% electric or hybrid vehicle purchases for our light-duty and aerial truck fleet moving forward, beginning with the first hybrid electric vehicle additions to the fleet in 2021; and•Transitioning Away from Coal Generation: We've committed to moving beyond coal-fired generation no later than 2050.Future resource plans to achieve carbon reductions, including potential changes in operations or any determination of retirement dates of the regulated coal-fired generating facilities, will be subject to the West Virginia legislation effective March 7, 2023, which requires prior approval from the West Virginia Public Energy Authority to decommission MP’s generating facilities, and may also be impacted by the potential acquisition of the Pleasants Power Station. We will work collaboratively with regulators in West Virginia to achieve our climate goals. Determination of the useful life of the regulated coal-fired generating facilities could result in changes in depreciation, and/or continued collection of net plant in rates after retirement, securitization, sale, impairment or regulatory disallowances. If MP is unable to recover these costs, it could have a material adverse effect on FirstEnergy’s and/or MP’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow.
On July 21, 2021, FE entered into a three-year DPA with the U.S. Attorney’s Office that, subject to court proceedings, resolves the U.S. Attorney’s Office investigation into FirstEnergy relating to FirstEnergy’s lobbying and governmental affairs activities concerning HB 6 related to the federal criminal allegations made in July 2020, against former Ohio House Speaker Larry Householder and other individuals and entities allegedly affiliated with Mr. Householder. Among other things, the DPA required FE to pay a monetary penalty of $230 million, which FE paid in the third quarter of 2021. Under the DPA, FE agreed to the filing of a criminal information charging FE with one count of conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud. The $230 million payment will neither be recovered in rates or charged to FirstEnergy customers nor will FirstEnergy seek any tax deduction related to such payment. The criminal information will be dismissed after FirstEnergy fully complies with its obligations under the DPA.The OAG, certain FE shareholders and FE customers filed several lawsuits against FirstEnergy and certain current and former directors, officers and other employees, each relating to the allegations against the now former Ohio House Speaker Larry Householder and other individuals and entities allegedly affiliated with Mr. Householder. On February 9, 2022, FE, acting through the SLC, agreed to a settlement term sheet to resolve multiple shareholder derivative lawsuits that were filed in the S.D. Ohio, the N.D. Ohio, and the Ohio Court of Common Pleas, Summit County. On March 11, 2022, the parties executed a stipulation and agreement of settlement, and filed a motion the same day requesting preliminary settlement approval in the S.D. Ohio. On August 23, 2022, the S.D. Ohio granted final approval of the settlement. On September 20, 2022, a purported FE stockholder filed a motion for reconsideration of the S.D. Ohio’s final settlement approval. The parties filed oppositions to that motion on October 11, 2022 and the motion is under consideration by the S.D. Ohio. The N.D. Ohio matter remains pending. The settlement agreement is expected to fully resolve these shareholder derivative lawsuits and includes a series of corporate governance enhancements.The settlement also includes a payment to FE of $180 million, to be paid by insurance after the judgment has become final, less $36 million in court-ordered attorney’s fees awarded to plaintiffs.In addition, on August 10, 2020, the SEC, through its Division of Enforcement, issued an order directing an investigation of possible securities laws violations by FE, and on September 1, 2020, issued subpoenas to FE and certain FE officers. Subsequently, on April 28, 2021, and July 11, 2022, the SEC issued additional subpoenas to FE. Further, in letters dated January 26, and February 22, 2021, staff of FERC's Division of Investigations notified FirstEnergy that it is investigating FirstEnergy’s lobbying and governmental affairs activities concerning HB 6. On December 30, 2022, FERC approved a Stipulation and Consent Agreement that resolves the investigation. The agreement obligates FE to pay a civil penalty of $3.86 million, which was paid in January 2023, and to submit two annual compliance monitoring reports to FERC’s Office of Enforcement regarding improvements to FirstEnergy’s compliance programs. FirstEnergy has taken numerous steps to address challenges posed by the HB 6 investigations and improve its compliance culture, including the refreshment of the FE Board, the hiring of key senior executives committed to supporting transparency and integrity, and strengthening and enhancing FirstEnergy’s compliance culture through several initiatives. Although the outcome of the HB 6 investigations and state regulatory audits remain unknown, FirstEnergy has also taken several proactive steps to reduce regulatory uncertainty affecting the Ohio Companies.Despite the many disruptions FirstEnergy is currently facing, the leadership team remains committed and focused on executing its strategy and running the business. See “Outlook - Other Legal Proceedings” below for additional details on the government investigations, the DPA, and subsequent litigation surrounding the investigation of HB 6. See also “Outlook - State Regulation - Ohio” below for details on the PUCO proceeding reviewing political and charitable spending and legislative activity in response to the investigation of HB 6. The outcome of the government investigations, PUCO proceedings, legislative activity, and any of these lawsuits is uncertain and could have a material adverse effect on FirstEnergy’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
The financial results discussed below include revenues and expenses from transactions among FirstEnergy’s business segments. A reconciliation of segment financial results is provided in Note 9, “Segment Information,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Financial results for FirstEnergy’s business segments in the first three months of 2023 and 2022 were as follows:
Regulated Distribution’s earnings attributable to FE decreased $29 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily resulting from lower weather-related customer usage, higher pension and OPEB expenses, and higher interest expense, partially offset by higher revenues from capital investment programs, higher weather-adjusted customer usage and demands and lower other operating expenses.
The $237 million increase in total revenues resulted from the following sources:
Distribution services revenues decreased $18 million in the first three months 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily resulting from lower weather-related customer usage and lower transmission recovery, partially offset by higher revenues from capital investment programs, higher weather-adjusted customer usage and demands, lower customer refunds and credits associated with the PUCO-approved Ohio Stipulation and other rider rate adjustments at the Pennsylvania Companies, which has no material impact to current period earnings, and higher rates associated with riders in Ohio and Pennsylvania for the recovery of certain capital investment programs.Distribution services by customer class are summarized in the following table:
(1) Includes street lighting.Residential and commercial distribution deliveries were impacted by lower weather-related customer usage. Heating degree days in the first three months of 2023 were 18% below the same period of 2022 and 19% below normal. Decreases in industrial deliveries were primarily from plastics and rubber manufacturing, nonmetallic mineral manufacturing, chemical manufacturing and fabricated metal sectors. Compared to pre-pandemic levels in 2019, weather-adjusted residential distribution deliveries for the first three months of 2023 increased 5%, while commercial and industrial deliveries decreased 3% and 4%, respectively.The following table summarizes the price and volume factors contributing to the $258 million increase in generation revenues for the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022:
The increase in retail generation sales volumes was primarily due to decreased customer shopping in New Jersey and Ohio, partially offset by lower weather-related usage. Total generation provided by alternative suppliers as a percentage of total MWH deliveries in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, decreased to 39% from 45% in New Jersey and to 58% from 83% in Ohio. The increase in retail generation prices primarily resulted from higher non-shopping generation auction rates. Retail generation sales, excluding those in West Virginia, have no material impact to earnings.Wholesale generation revenues decreased $43 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to lower capacity revenues and sales volumes. The difference between current wholesale generation revenues and certain energy costs incurred are deferred for future recovery or refund, with no material impact to current period earnings.
Total operating expenses increased $210 million, primarily due to the following:•Fuel costs decreased $7 million during the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to lower generation output, partially offset by higher unit costs. Due to the ENEC, fuel expense has no material impact on current period earnings. •Purchased power costs, which have no material impact on current period earnings, increased $250 million during the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to higher prices and increased volumes as described above, partially offset by lower capacity expenses.
•Other operating expenses decreased $12 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to:•Lower other operating and maintenance expenses of $25 million, primarily associated with lower employee benefits and vegetation contractor spend.•Lower network transmission expenses of $9 million. These costs are deferred for future recovery, resulting in no material impact on current period earnings.•Higher storm expenses of $4 million, nearly all of which was deferred.•Higher vegetation management in West Virginia, energy efficiency and other state mandated program costs of $4 million, which are deferred for future recovery, resulting in no material impact on current period earnings.•Higher uncollectible expenses of $14 million, of which $11 million was deferred for future recovery. •Depreciation expense increased $16 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to a higher asset base. •Amortization (deferral) of regulatory assets, net decreased $41 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to:•$30 million decrease due to lower transmission related amortization and deferrals,•$12 million decrease due to lower energy efficiency related deferrals, •$8 million decrease due to higher deferred uncollectible expenses,•$18 million related to net decreases in recovery of certain program costs and other amortizations, and•$6 million decrease due to higher deferral of storm related expenses, partially offset by•$33 million increase due to the absence of the customer refunds associated with the Ohio Stipulation. •General taxes increased $4 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to higher gross receipts taxes, partially offset by lower Ohio property taxes.
Other expense increased $69 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to higher pension and OPEB non-service costs, higher borrowings under the revolving credit facilities, higher rates on regulated money pool borrowings, and higher interest from long-term debt issuances since the first quarter of 2022.
Regulated Distribution’s effective tax rate was 19.2% and 20.7% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Regulated Transmission’s earnings attributable to FE decreased $11 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to the 19.9% minority equity interest sale in FET that closed in May 2022, and charges resulting from ongoing audits and proceedings, partially offset by higher rate base and lower net financing costs.
Total revenues increased $8 million, primarily due to the recovery of higher rate base and operating expenses, partially offset by the absence of a formula rate adjustment at JCP&L in the first quarter of 2022.The following table shows revenues by transmission asset owner:
Total operating expenses increased $1 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to higher depreciation from a higher asset base partially offset by lower operating and maintenance expenses. Nearly all operating expenses are recovered through formula rates, resulting in no material impact on current period earnings.
Total other expense increased $1 million in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to higher pension and OPEB non-service costs partially offset by higher capitalized financing cost.
Regulated Transmission’s effective tax rate was 23.3% and 24.7% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Financial results at Corporate/Other resulted in a $44 million decrease in loss attributable to FE in the first three months of 2023, as compared to the same period of 2022. This was primarily due to higher investment earnings on FEV’s equity method investment in Global Holding and corporate-owned life insurance policies, and lower interest and debt redemption expenses from the redemption of FE notes during 2022. These were partially offset by higher other operating expenses primarily associated with the cancellation of a sponsorship agreement, higher investigation and other related costs, higher pension and OPEB non-service costs, and lower income tax benefits.
Regulatory assets represent incurred costs that have been deferred because of their probable future recovery from customers through regulated rates. Regulatory liabilities represent amounts that are expected to be credited to customers through future regulated rates or amounts collected from customers for costs not yet incurred. FirstEnergy, the Utilities and the Transmission Companies net their regulatory assets and liabilities based on federal and state jurisdictions.Management assesses the probability of recovery of regulatory assets, and settlement of regulatory liabilities, at each balance sheet date and whenever new events occur. Factors that may affect probability relate to changes in the regulatory environment, issuance of a regulatory commission order or passage of new legislation. Upon material changes to these factors, where applicable, FirstEnergy will record new regulatory assets and liabilities and will assess whether it is probable that currently recorded regulatory assets and liabilities will be recovered or settled in future rates.The following table provides information about the composition of net regulatory assets and liabilities as of March 31, 2023, and December 31, 2022, and the changes during the three months ended March 31, 2023:
The following is a description of the regulatory assets and liabilities described above:Customer payables for future income taxes - Reflects amounts to be recovered or refunded through future rates to pay income taxes that become payable when rate revenue is provided to recover items such as AFUDC-equity and depreciation of property, plant and equipment for which deferred income taxes were not recognized for ratemaking purposes, including amounts attributable to federal and state tax rate changes such as the Tax Act and Pennsylvania House Bill 1342. These amounts are being amortized over the period in which the related deferred tax assets reverse, which is generally over the expected life of the underlying asset. Spent nuclear fuel disposal costs - Reflects amounts collected from customers, and the investment income, losses and changes in fair value of the trusts for spent nuclear fuel disposal costs related to former nuclear generating facilities, Oyster Creek and TMI-1.Asset removal costs - Primarily represents the rates charged to customers that include a provision for the cost of future activities to remove assets, including obligations for which an asset retirement obligation has been recognized, that are expected to be incurred at the time of retirement.Deferred transmission costs - Reflects differences between revenues earned based on actual costs for FirstEnergy’s formula-rate transmission subsidiaries and the amounts billed, including amounts expected to be refunded to, or recoverable from, wholesale transmission customers resulting from the FERC Audit, as further described below, which amounts are recorded as a regulatory asset or liability and recovered or refunded, respectively, in subsequent periods. Also included is the recovery of non-market based costs or fees charged to certain of the Utilities by various regulatory bodies including FERC and RTOs, which can include PJM charges and credits for service including, but not limited to, procuring transmission services and transmission enhancement.Deferred generation costs - Primarily relates to regulatory assets associated with the securitized recovery of certain fuel and purchased power regulatory assets at the Ohio Companies (amortized through 2034) as well as the ENEC at MP and PE. MP and PE recover net power supply costs, including fuel costs, purchased power costs and related expenses, net of related market sales revenue through the ENEC. Generally, the ENEC rate is updated annually.Deferred distribution costs - Relates to the Ohio Companies' deferral of certain distribution-related expenses, including interest (amortized through 2034), costs related to the AMI and electric vehicle programs in New Jersey, and smart meters program in Pennsylvania.Storm-related costs - Relates to the deferral of storm costs, which vary by jurisdiction. Approximately $221 million and $206 million are currently being recovered through rates as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.Pandemic-related costs - Includes the deferral of incremental costs arising from the pandemic and in some cases including uncollectible expenses.Energy efficiency program costs - Relates to the recovery of costs in excess of revenues associated with energy efficiency programs including New Jersey energy efficiency and renewable energy programs, the Pennsylvania Companies’ EE&C programs, the Ohio Companies’ Demand Side Management and Energy Efficiency Rider, and PE’s EmPOWER Maryland Surcharge. Investments in certain of these energy efficiency programs earn a long-term return.New Jersey societal benefit costs - Primarily relates to regulatory assets associated with MGP remediation, universal service and lifeline funds, and the New Jersey Clean Energy Program.Vegetation management costs - Relates to regulatory assets associated with the recovery of certain distribution vegetation management costs in New Jersey and West Virginia as well as certain transmission vegetation management costs at MAIT, ATSI and WP/PE, which are amortized through 2024, 2030 and 2036, respectively.The following table provides information about the composition of net regulatory assets that do not earn a current return as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, of which approximately $535 million and $511 million, respectively, are currently being recovered through rates over varying periods, through 2068, depending on the nature of the deferral and the jurisdiction:
FirstEnergy’s business is capital intensive, requiring significant resources to fund operating expenses, construction and other investment expenditures, scheduled debt maturities and interest payments, dividend payments and potential contributions to its pension plan.FE and its distribution and transmission subsidiaries expect their existing sources of liquidity to remain sufficient to meet their respective anticipated obligations. In addition to internal sources to fund liquidity and capital requirements for 2023 and beyond, FE and its distribution and transmission subsidiaries expect to rely on external sources of funds. Short-term cash requirements not met by cash provided from operations are generally satisfied through short-term borrowings. Long-term cash needs may be met through the issuance of long-term debt by FE and certain of its distribution and transmission subsidiaries to, among other things, fund capital expenditures and other capital-like investments, and refinance short-term and maturing long-term debt, subject to market conditions and other factors. In certain instances, FE may utilize instruments other than senior notes to fund its liquidity and capital requirements, including hybrid securities. In alignment with FirstEnergy’s strategy to invest in its Regulated Distribution and Regulated Transmission segments as a fully regulated company, FirstEnergy is focused on maintaining balance sheet strength and flexibility. Specifically, at the regulated businesses, regulatory authority has been obtained for various regulated distribution and transmission subsidiaries to issue and/or refinance debt.Any financing plans by FE or any of its consolidated subsidiaries, including the issuance of equity and debt, and the refinancing of short-term and maturing long-term debt are subject to market conditions and other factors. No assurance can be given that any such issuances, financing or refinancing, as the case may be, will be completed as anticipated or at all. Any delay in the completion of financing plans could require FE or any of its consolidated subsidiaries to utilize short-term borrowing capacity, which could impact available liquidity. In addition, FE and its consolidated subsidiaries expect to continually evaluate any planned financings, which may result in changes from time to time.On February 2, 2023, FE, along with FET, entered into the FET P&SA II with Brookfield and the Brookfield Guarantors, pursuant to which FE agreed to sell to Brookfield at the closing, and Brookfield agreed to purchase from FE, an incremental 30% equity interest in FET for a purchase price of $3.5 billion. The purchase price will be payable in part by the issuance of a promissory note expected to be in the principal amount of $1.75 billion. The remaining $1.75 billion of the purchase price will be payable in cash at the closing. As a result of the consummation of the transaction, Brookfield’s interest in FET will increase from 19.9% to 49.9%, while FE will retain the remaining 50.1% ownership interests of FET. The transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including approval from the FERC and certain state utility commissions, and completion of review by the CFIUS. In addition, pursuant to the FET P&SA II, FirstEnergy has agreed to make the necessary filings with the applicable regulatory authorities for the PA Consolidation. The FET Minority Equity Interest Sale is expected to close by early 2024. Upon closing, FET will continue to be consolidated in FirstEnergy’s GAAP financial statements.FirstEnergy is proceeding with the consolidation of the Pennsylvania Companies into FE PA, a new, single operating entity. The PA Consolidation will require, among other steps: (a) the transfer of certain Pennsylvania-based transmission assets owned by WP to KATCo, (b) the contribution of Class B equity interests of MAIT currently held by PN and ME to FE (and ultimately transferred to FET as part of the FET Minority Equity Interest Sale), (c) the formation of FE PA and (d) the merger of each of the Pennsylvania Companies with and into FE PA, with FE PA surviving such mergers as the successor-in-interest to all assets and liabilities of the Pennsylvania Companies. Following completion of the PA Consolidation, FE PA will be FE’s only regulated utility in Pennsylvania encompassing the operations previously conducted individually by the Pennsylvania Companies and is expected to realize increased regulatory and administrative efficiencies, streamlined operational functions and certain financing benefits. Consummation of the PA Consolidation is contingent upon numerous conditions, including the approval of NYPSC, PPUC and FERC, which filings were submitted on March 6, 2023. Subject to receipt of such regulatory approvals, FirstEnergy expects that the PA Consolidation will close by early 2024.In light of the FET P&SA I transaction completed in 2022 and the FET P&SA II announced earlier this year, FirstEnergy does not currently anticipate the need to issue additional equity through 2025, with the exception of annual issuances of up to $100 million under regular dividend reinvestment plans and employee benefit stock investment plans.Economic conditions following the global pandemic, have increased lead times across numerous material categories, with some as much as doubling from pre-pandemic lead times. Some key suppliers have struggled with labor shortages and raw material availability, which along with increasing inflationary pressure, have increased costs and decreased the availability of certain materials, equipment and contractors. FirstEnergy has taken steps to mitigate these risks and does not currently expect service disruptions or any material impact on its capital spending plan. However, the situation remains fluid and a prolonged continuation or further increase in supply chain disruptions could have an adverse effect on FirstEnergy’s results of operations, cash flow and financial condition. As of March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy’s net deficit in working capital (current assets less current liabilities) was primarily due to accounts payable, currently payable long-term debt, short-term borrowings, and accrued interest, taxes, and compensation and benefits. FirstEnergy believes its cash from operations and available liquidity will be sufficient to meet its current working capital needs.
On October 18, 2021, FE, FET, the Utilities, and the Transmission Companies entered into the 2021 Credit Facilities, which were six separate senior unsecured five-year syndicated revolving credit facilities with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., Mizuho Bank, Ltd. and PNC Bank, National Association that replaced the FE Revolving Facility and the FET Revolving Facility, and provide for aggregate commitments of $4.5 billion. The 2021 Credit Facilities are available until October 18, 2026, as follows:•FE and FET, $1.0 billion revolving credit facility;•Ohio Companies, $800 million revolving credit facility;•Pennsylvania Companies, $950 million revolving credit facility;•JCP&L, $500 million revolving credit facility;•MP and PE, $400 million revolving credit facility; and•Transmission Companies, $850 million revolving credit facility.Under the 2021 Credit Facilities, an aggregate amount of $4.5 billion is available to be borrowed, repaid and reborrowed, subject to each borrower’s respective sublimit under the respective facilities. These new credit facilities provide substantial liquidity to support the Regulated Distribution and Regulated Transmission businesses, and each of the operating companies within the businesses.Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Facilities may be used for working capital and other general corporate purposes. Generally, borrowings under each of the credit facilities are available to each borrower separately and mature on the earlier of 364 days from the date of borrowing or the commitment termination date, as the same may be extended. Each of the 2021 Credit Facilities contain financial covenants requiring each borrower, with the exception of FE, to maintain a consolidated debt-to-total-capitalization ratio (as defined under each of the 2021 Credit Facilities) of no more than 65%, and 75% for FET, measured at the end of each fiscal quarter. FE is required under its 2021 Credit Facility to maintain a consolidated interest coverage ratio of not less than 2.50 times, measured at the end of each fiscal quarter for the last four fiscal quarters beginning with the quarter ending December 31, 2021.FirstEnergy’s 2021 Credit Facilities, as amended by the 2023 Amendments, bear interest at fluctuating interest rates, primarily based on SOFR, including term SOFR and daily simple SOFR. FirstEnergy has not hedged its interest rate exposure with respect to its floating rate debt. Accordingly, FirstEnergy’s interest expense for any particular period will fluctuate based on LIBOR and other variable interest rates. Interest rates have increased significantly, which has caused the rate and interest expense on borrowings under the 2021 Credit Facilities, as amended by the 2023 Amendments, to be significantly higher. Restricted access to capital markets and/or increased borrowing costs could have an adverse effect on FirstEnergy’s results of operations, cash flows, financial condition and liquidity.FirstEnergy had $550 million and $100 million of outstanding short-term borrowings as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. FirstEnergy’s available liquidity from external sources as of April 24, 2023, was as follows:
The following table summarizes the limitations on short-term indebtedness applicable to each borrower under current regulatory approvals and applicable statutory and/or charter limitations as of March 31, 2023:
Subject to each borrower’s sublimit, the amounts noted below are available for the issuance of LOCs (subject to borrowings drawn under the 2021 Credit Facilities) expiring up to one year from the date of issuance. The stated amount of outstanding LOCs will count against total commitments available under each of the 2021 Credit Facilities and against the applicable borrower’s borrowing sublimit. As of March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy had $4 million in outstanding LOCs.
The 2021 Credit Facilities do not contain provisions that restrict the ability to borrow or accelerate payment of outstanding advances in the event of any change in credit ratings of the borrowers. Pricing is defined in “pricing grids,” whereby the cost of funds borrowed under the 2021 Credit Facilities are related to the credit ratings of the company borrowing the funds. Additionally, borrowings under each of the 2021 Credit Facilities are subject to the usual and customary provisions for acceleration upon the occurrence of events of default, including a cross-default for other indebtedness in excess of $100 million.As of March 31, 2023, the borrowers were in compliance with the applicable interest coverage and debt-to-total-capitalization ratio covenants in each case as defined under the 2021 Credit Facilities.
FirstEnergy’s utility operating subsidiary companies also have the ability to borrow from each other and FE to meet their short-term working capital requirements. Similar but separate arrangements exist among FirstEnergy’s unregulated companies with AE Supply, FE, FET, FEV and certain other unregulated subsidiaries. FESC administers these money pools and tracks surplus funds of FE and the respective regulated and unregulated subsidiaries, as the case may be, as well as proceeds available from bank borrowings. Companies receiving a loan under the money pool agreements must repay the principal amount of the loan, together with accrued interest, within 364 days of borrowing the funds. The rate of interest is the same for each company receiving a loan from their respective pool and is based on the average cost of funds available through the pool. Interest rates have increased significantly, which has caused the rate and interest expense on borrowings under the 2021 Credit Facilities, as amended by the 2023 Amendments, to be significantly higher. The average interest rate for borrowings through the first quarter of 2023 and 2022 was 5.84% and 0.37%, respectively, per annum for the regulated companies’ money pool and 5.19% and 0.52%, respectively, per annum for the unregulated companies’ money pool.
FE’s and its subsidiaries’ access to capital markets and costs of financing are influenced by the credit ratings of their securities. The following table displays FE’s and its subsidiaries’ credit ratings as of April 24, 2023:
(1) S = Stable, P = PositiveThe applicable undrawn and drawn margin on the 2021 Credit Facilities are subject to ratings based pricing grids. The applicable fee paid on the undrawn commitments under the 2021 Credit Facilities are based on each borrower’s senior unsecured non-credit enhanced debt ratings as determined by S&P and Moody’s. The fees paid on actual borrowings are determined based on each borrower’s senior unsecured non-credit enhanced debt ratings as determined by S&P and Moody’s.The interest rates payable on approximately $2.1 billion in FE’s senior unsecured notes are subject to adjustments from time to time if the ratings on the notes from any one or more of S&P, Moody’s and Fitch decreases to a rating set forth in the applicable governing documents. Generally, a one-notch downgrade by the applicable rating agency may result in a 25 basis point coupon rate increase beginning at BB, Ba1, and BB+ for S&P, Moody’s and Fitch, respectively, to the extent such rating is applicable to the series of outstanding senior unsecured notes, during the next interest period, subject to an aggregate cap of 2% from issuance interest rate.Debt capacity is subject to the consolidated interest coverage ratio in the 2021 Credit Facilities. As of March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy could incur approximately $790 million of incremental interest expense or incur a $2.0 billion reduction to the consolidated interest coverage earnings numerator, as defined under the covenant, and FE would remain within the limitations of the financial covenant requirements by the 2021 Credit Facilities.
FirstEnergy has certain obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts. For an in-depth discussion of FirstEnergy’s cash requirements and commitments, see “Capital Resources and Liquidity - Cash Requirements and Commitments" in Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" within FirstEnergy’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 (filed on February 13, 2023).
As of March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy had $177 million of cash and cash equivalents and $29 million of restricted cash compared to $160 million of cash and cash equivalents and $46 million of restricted cash as of December 31, 2022, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
FirstEnergy’s most significant sources of cash are derived from electric service provided by its distribution and transmission operating subsidiaries. The most significant use of cash from operating activities is buying electricity to serve non-shopping customers, return of cash collateral associated with certain generation suppliers that serve shopping customers, and paying fuel suppliers, employees, tax authorities, lenders and others for a wide range of materials and services.Cash provided from (used for) operating activities was $(112) million compared to $355 million in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, respectively. Cash flows from operating activities were a net outflow in the first quarter of 2023, primarily due to the timing of accounts payable payments for purchased power and the return of $144 million in net cash collateral to generation suppliers previously received due to changes in power prices. Compared to the same period of 2022, the decrease is primarily due to: •Higher accounts payable payments, primarily on generation energy purchases for certain customers,•The return of cash collateral to certain generation suppliers that serve shopping customers that was previously received as a result of changes in power prices, partially offset by•Higher cash dividend distributions received by FEV from its equity investment in Global Holding, and•Lower customer refunds and credits associated with the PUCO-approved Ohio Stipulation.
Cash used for investing activities in the first three months of 2023 principally represented cash used for capital investments. The following table summarizes investing activities for the first three months of 2023 and 2022:
Cash used for investing activities for the first three months of 2023 increased $124 million, compared to the same period of 2022, primarily due to capital investments.
In the first three months of 2023 and 2022, cash provided from (used for) financing activities was $828 million and $(964) million, respectively. The following table summarizes financing activities for the first three months of 2023 and 2022:
FirstEnergy had the following redemptions and issuances during the three months ended March 31, 2023:
On April 20, 2023, ATSI priced $150 million of 5.13% unsecured notes due 2033. The notes will be funded on May 16, 2023. Proceeds of the issuance will be used to refinance existing debt, including amounts outstanding under the regulated companies’ money pool, for capital expenditures, and for other general corporate purposes. FE or its affiliates may, from time to time, seek to retire or purchase outstanding debt through open-market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will be upon such terms and at such prices as FE or its affiliates may determine, and will depend on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
FirstEnergy has various financial and performance guarantees and indemnifications, which are issued in the normal course of business. These contracts include performance guarantees, stand-by LOCs, debt guarantees, surety bonds and indemnifications. FirstEnergy enters into these arrangements to facilitate commercial transactions with third parties by enhancing the value of the transaction to the third party. The maximum potential amount of future payments FirstEnergy and its subsidiaries could be required to make under these guarantees as of March 31, 2023, was approximately $1 billion, as summarized below:
In the normal course of business, FE and its subsidiaries may enter into physical or financially settled contracts for the sale and purchase of electric capacity, energy, fuel and emission allowances. Certain agreements contain provisions that require FE or its subsidiaries to post collateral. This collateral may be posted in the form of cash or credit support with thresholds contingent upon FE’s or its subsidiaries’ credit rating from each of the major credit rating agencies. The collateral and credit support requirements vary by contract and by counterparty.As of March 31, 2023, $54 million of net cash collateral has been posted by FE or its subsidiaries and is included in “Prepaid taxes and other current assets” on FirstEnergy’s Consolidated Balance Sheets. FE or its subsidiaries are holding $66 million of net cash collateral as of March 31, 2023, from certain generation suppliers, primarily due to the rise in power prices, and such amount is included in “Other current liabilities” on FirstEnergy’s Consolidated Balance Sheets.These credit-risk-related contingent features stipulate that if the subsidiary were to be downgraded or lose its investment grade credit rating (based on its senior unsecured debt rating), it would be required to provide additional collateral. The following table discloses the potential additional credit rating contingent contractual collateral obligations as of March 31, 2023:
(1) Surety bonds are not tied to a credit rating. Surety bonds’ impact assumes maximum contractual obligations, which is ordinarily 100% of the face amount of the surety bond except with respect to $39 million of surety bond obligations for which the collateral obligation is capped at 60% of the face amount, and typical obligations require 30 days to cure.
FirstEnergy uses various market risk sensitive instruments, including derivative contracts, primarily to manage the risk of price and interest rate fluctuations. FirstEnergy’s Enterprise Risk Management Committee, comprised of members of senior management, provides general oversight for risk management activities throughout FirstEnergy.
FirstEnergy has limited exposure to financial risks resulting from fluctuating commodity prices, such as prices for electricity, coal and energy transmission. FirstEnergy’s Risk Management Department and Enterprise Risk Management Committee are responsible for promoting the effective design and implementation of sound risk management programs and overseeing compliance with corporate risk management policies and established risk management practice.The valuation of derivative contracts is based on observable market information. As of March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy has a net liability of $3 million in non-hedge derivative contracts that are related to FTRs at certain of the Utilities. FTRs are subject to regulatory accounting and do not impact earnings.
As of March 31, 2023, the FirstEnergy pension plan assets were allocated approximately as follows: 36% in equity securities, 14% in fixed income securities, 10% in alternatives, 12% in real estate, 16% in private debt/equity, 9% in derivatives and 3% in cash and short-term securities. Under current assumptions, including an expected future annual return on assets of 8.0%, FirstEnergy does not currently expect to have a required contribution to the pension plan. However, a decline in the value of pension plan assets could result in additional funding requirements and FirstEnergy may elect to contribute to the pension plan voluntarily. As of March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy’s OPEB plan assets were allocated approximately as follows: 47% in equity securities, 49% in fixed income securities and 4% in cash and short-term securities. See Note 4, “Pension and Other Post-Employment Benefits,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details on FirstEnergy’s pension and OPEB plans.In the three months ended March 31, 2023, FirstEnergy’s pension and OPEB plan assets have gained approximately 6.9% and 4.6%, respectively, as compared to an annual expected return on plan assets of 8% and 7%, respectively.
FirstEnergy recognizes net actuarial gains or losses for its pension and OPEB plans in the fourth quarter of each year and whenever a plan is determined to qualify for a remeasurement. A primary factor contributing to these actuarial gains and losses are changes in the discount rates used to value pension and OPEB obligations as of the measurement date and the difference between expected and actual returns on the plans’ assets. The remaining components of pension and OPEB expense, primarily service costs, interest cost on obligations, expected return on plan assets and amortization of prior service costs, are set at the beginning of the calendar year and are recorded on a monthly basis. Changes in asset performance and discount rates will not impact these pension costs for 2023, however, future years could be impacted by changes in the market.FirstEnergy utilizes a spot rate approach in the estimation of the components of benefit cost by applying specific spot rates along the full yield curve to the relevant projected cash flows. As of March 31, 2023, the spot rate was 5.00% and 4.92% for pension and OPEB obligations, respectively, as compared to 5.23% and 5.16% as of December 31, 2022, respectively. Estimating the final discount rate and return or loss on plan assets as of the year-end remeasurement date is difficult to predict based on the currently volatile equity markets and rising interest rate environment. As a result, FirstEnergy is unable to determine or meaningfully project the mark-to-market adjustment, or estimate a reasonable range of adjustment, that will be recorded as of December 31, 2023.FirstEnergy’s 2021 Credit Facilities, as amended by the 2023 Amendments, bear interest at fluctuating interest rates, primarily based on SOFR, including term SOFR and daily simple SOFR. FirstEnergy has not hedged its interest rate exposure with respect to its floating rate debt. Accordingly, FirstEnergy’s interest expense for any particular period will fluctuate based on LIBOR and other variable interest rates. Interest rates have increased significantly, which has caused the rate and interest expense on borrowings under the 2021 Credit Facilities, as amended by the 2023 Amendments, to be significantly higher.
Economic conditions following the global pandemic, have increased lead times across numerous material categories, with some as much as doubling from pre-pandemic lead times. Some key suppliers have struggled with labor shortages and raw material availability, which along with increasing inflationary pressure, have increased costs and decreased the availability of certain materials, equipment and contractors. FirstEnergy has taken steps to mitigate these risks and does not currently expect service disruptions or any material impact on its capital spending plan. However, the situation remains fluid and a prolonged continuation or further increase in supply chain disruptions could have an adverse effect on FirstEnergy’s results of operations, cash flow and financial condition.
Credit risk is the risk that FirstEnergy would incur a loss as a result of nonperformance by counterparties of their contractual obligations. FirstEnergy maintains credit policies and procedures with respect to counterparty credit (including a requirement that counterparties maintain specified credit ratings) and require other assurances in the form of credit support or collateral in certain circumstance in order to limit counterparty credit risk. FirstEnergy has concentrations of suppliers and customers among electric utilities, financial institutions and energy marketing and trading companies. These concentrations may impact FirstEnergy’s overall exposure to credit risk, positively or negatively, as counterparties may be similarly affected by changes in economic, regulatory or other conditions. In the event an energy supplier of the Ohio Companies, Pennsylvania Companies, JCP&L or PE defaults on its obligation, the affected company would be required to seek replacement power in the market. In general, subject to regulatory review or other processes, it is expected that appropriate incremental costs incurred by these entities would be recoverable from customers through applicable rate mechanisms, thereby mitigating the financial risk for these entities. FirstEnergy’s credit policies to manage credit risk include the use of an established credit approval process, daily credit mitigation provisions, such as margin, prepayment or collateral requirements. FirstEnergy and its subsidiaries may request additional credit assurance, in certain circumstances, in the event that the counterparties’ credit ratings fall below investment grade, their tangible net worth falls below specified percentages or their exposures exceed an established credit limit.
On August 16, 2022, President Biden signed into law the IRA of 2022, which, among other things, imposes a new 15% corporate AMT based on AFSI applicable to corporations with a three-year average AFSI over $1 billion. The AMT is effective for the 2023 tax year and, if applicable, corporations must pay the greater of the regular corporate income tax or the AMT. Although NOL carryforwards created through the regular corporate income tax system cannot be used to reduce the AMT, financial statement net operating losses can be used to reduce AFSI and the amount of AMT owed. The IRA of 2022 as enacted requires the U.S. Treasury to provide regulations and other guidance necessary to administer the AMT, including further defining allowable adjustments to determine AFSI, which directly impacts the amount of AMT to be paid. Based on interim guidance issued by the U.S. Treasury in late December 2022, FirstEnergy continues to believe that it is more likely than not it will be subject to the AMT beginning in 2023. Accordingly, FirstEnergy made a first quarter estimated payment of AMT of approximately $49 million in April 2023. However, until final U.S. Treasury guidance is issued, the amount of AMT FirstEnergy pays could be significantly different than current estimates or it may not be a payer at all. The regulatory treatment of the impacts of this legislation will also be subject to the discretion of the FERC and state public utility commissions. Any adverse development in this legislation, including guidance from the U.S. Treasury and/or the IRS or unfavorable regulatory treatment, could reduce FirstEnergy’s future cash flows and impact financial condition.
Each of the Utilities' retail rates, conditions of service, issuance of securities and other matters are subject to regulation in the states in which it operates - in Maryland by the MDPSC, in New Jersey by the NJBPU, in Ohio by the PUCO, in Pennsylvania by the PPUC, in West Virginia by the WVPSC and in New York by the NYPSC. The transmission operations of PE in Virginia, ATSI in Ohio, and the Transmission Companies in Pennsylvania are subject to certain regulations of the VSCC, PUCO and PPUC, respectively. In addition, under Ohio law, municipalities may regulate rates of a public utility, subject to appeal to the PUCO if not acceptable to the utility. Further, if any of the FirstEnergy affiliates were to engage in the construction of significant new transmission facilities, depending on the state, they may be required to obtain state and/or local regulatory authorization to site, construct and operate the new transmission facility.
PE operates under MDPSC approved base rates that were effective as of March 23, 2019. PE also provides SOS pursuant to a combination of settlement agreements, MDPSC orders and regulations, and statutory provisions. SOS supply is competitively procured in the form of rolling contracts of varying lengths through periodic auctions that are overseen by the MDPSC and a third-party monitor. Although settlements with respect to SOS supply for PE customers have expired, service continues in the same manner until changed by order of the MDPSC. PE recovers its costs plus a return for providing SOS. On March 22, 2023, PE filed a base rate case with the MDPSC, utilizing a test year based on twelve months of actual 2022 data. The base rate case requests an annual net increase in distribution revenues of $44 million, plus a request to establish a regulatory asset (or liability) to recover (or refund) in a subsequent base rate case the net differences between the amount of pension and OPEB expense requested in the proceeding (based on average expense from 2018 to 2022) and the actual annual amount each year using the delayed recognition method. The rate case additionally requests approval to continue an Electric Distribution Investment Surcharge to fund three service reliability and resiliency programs, two new proposed programs to assist low-income customers and cost recovery of certain expenses associated with PE’s pilot electric vehicle charger program and its COVID-19 pandemic response. PE expects that new rates will be effective in the fourth quarter of 2023.The EmPOWER Maryland program requires each electric utility to file a plan to reduce electric consumption and demand 0.2% per year, up to the ultimate goal of 2% annual savings, for the duration of the 2021-2023 EmPOWER Maryland program cycles to the extent the MDPSC determines that cost-effective programs and services are available. PE's approved 2021-2023 EmPOWER Maryland plan continues and expands upon prior years' programs for a projected total investment of approximately $148 million over the three-year period. PE recovers program investments with a return through an annually reconciled surcharge, with most costs subject to recovery over a five-year period with a return on the unamortized balance. On October 28, 2022, PE submitted its plan, as ordered by the MDPSC, to recover all unamortized balances by the scheduled expiration of the EmPOWER program on December 31, 2029. At the further direction of the MDPSC, PE filed a revised plan on January 11, 2023. Maryland law only allows for the utility to recover lost distribution revenue attributable to energy efficiency or demand reduction programs through a base rate case proceeding.On April 17, 2023, PE submitted a proposal to the MDPSC seeking approval to end its PPA with the Warrior Run generating station. The PPA for Warrior Run was a requirement of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978. PE’s Maryland customers currently pay a surcharge on their electric bill in connection with the Warrior Run PPA, which fluctuates from year to year based on the difference between what PE pays for the output of the plant and what PE is able to recover by reselling that output into PJM. PE negotiated a termination of the PPA requiring it to pay Warrior Run, subject to MDPSC approval, a fixed amount of $51 million annually through 2029, for a total of $357 million. Since the termination fee would be recovered through the current surcharge, there would be no impact to FirstEnergy’s or PE’s earnings. Based on the submitted proposal to the MDPSC, net of the termination fee, ending the PPA is expected to save PE’s Maryland customers approximately $80 million in total.
JCP&L operates under NJBPU approved rates that took effect as of January 1, 2021, and were effective for customers as of November 1, 2021. JCP&L provides BGS for retail customers who do not choose a third-party EGS and for customers of third- party EGSs that fail to provide the contracted service. All New Jersey EDCs participate in this competitive BGS procurement process and recover BGS costs directly from customers as a charge separate from base rates.On March 16, 2023, JCP&L filed a base rate case with the NJBPU, utilizing a test year based on six months of actual data for the second half of calendar year 2022, and six months of forecasted data for the first half of calendar year 2023. The rate case requests an annual net increase in base distribution revenues of approximately $185 million, plus a request to establish a regulatory asset (or liability) to recover (or refund) in a subsequent base rate case the net differences between the amount of pension and OPEB expense requested in the proceeding (based on 2023 expense) and the actual annual amount each year using the delayed recognition method. In addition to the above, JCP&L’s request includes, among other things, approval of two new proposed programs to assist low-income customers, cost recovery of certain investments and expenses associated with its electric vehicle and AMI programs, an update of its depreciation rates, modifications to its storm cost recovery, and tariff modifications to update standard construction costs. JCP&L expects that the revised rates will become effective by early 2024.JCP&L has instituted energy efficiency and peak demand reduction programs in accordance with the New Jersey Clean Energy Act as approved by the NJBPU in April 2021. The NJBPU approved plans include recovery of lost revenues resulting from the programs and a three-year plan including total program costs of $203 million, of which $160 million of investment is recovered over a ten-year amortization period with a return as well as operations and maintenance expenses and financing costs of $43 million recovered on an annual basis.On March 6, 2023, the NJBPU issued final rules modifying its regulations to reflect its CTA policy in base rate cases to: (i) calculate savings using a five-year look back from the beginning of the test year; (ii) allocate 100% of CTA savings to customers; and (iii) exclude transmission assets of EDCs in the savings calculation. The final rules of practice were applied by JCP&L in its most recent base rate case filing described above.On October 28, 2020, the NJBPU approved a stipulated settlement between JCP&L and various parties, resolving JCP&L’s request for distribution base rate increase. The settlement provided for a $94 million annual base distribution revenues increase for JCP&L based on an ROE of 9.6%, which became effective for customers on November 1, 2021. The settlement additionally provided that JCP&L would be subject to a management audit, which began in May 2021. On April 12, 2023, the NJBPU accepted the final management audit report for filing purposes and ordered that interested stakeholders file comments on the report by May 22, 2023.On July 2, 2020, the NJBPU issued an order allowing New Jersey utilities to track and create a regulatory asset for future recovery of all prudently incurred incremental costs arising from the COVID-19 pandemic beginning March 9, 2020 and continuing until the New Jersey Governor issues an order stating that the COVID-19 pandemic is no longer in effect. New Jersey utilities can request recovery of such regulatory asset in a stand-alone COVID-19 regulatory asset filing or future base rate case. On October 28, 2020, the NJBPU issued an order expanding the scope of the proceeding to examine all pandemic issues, including recovery of the COVID-19 regulatory assets, by way of a generic proceeding. No moratorium on residential disconnections remains in effect for investor-owned electric utilities such as JCP&L. Legislation was enacted on March 25, 2022, prohibiting utilities from disconnecting electric service to customers that have applied for utility bill assistance before June 15, 2022 until such time as the state agency administering the assistance program makes a decision on the application and further requiring that all utilities offer a deferred payment arrangement meeting certain minimum criteria after the state agency’s decision on the application has been made.On September 17, 2021, in connection with Mid-Atlantic Offshore Development, LLC, a transmission company jointly owned by Shell New Energies US and EDF Renewables North America, JCP&L submitted a proposal to the NJBPU and PJM to build transmission infrastructure connecting offshore wind-generated electricity to the New Jersey power grid. On October 26, 2022, the JCP&L proposal was accepted, in part, in an order issued by NJBPU. The proposal, as accepted, included approximately $723 million in investments for JCP&L to both build new and upgrade existing transmission infrastructure. JCP&L’s proposal projects an investment ROE of 10.2% and includes the option for JCP&L to acquire up to a 20% equity stake in Mid-Atlantic Offshore Development, LLC. The resulting rates associated with the project are expected to be shared among the ratepayers of all New Jersey electric utilities. On April 17, 2023, JCP&L applied for the FERC “abandonment” transmission rates incentive, which would provide for recovery of 100% of the cancelled prudent project costs that are incurred after the incentive is approved, and 50% of the costs incurred prior to that date, in the event that some or all of the project is cancelled for reasons beyond JCP&L’s control. Construction is expected to begin in 2025.
The Ohio Companies operate under PUCO-approved base distribution rates that became effective in 2009. The Ohio Companies currently operate under ESP IV, effective June 1, 2016 and continuing through May 31, 2024, that continues the supply of power to non-shopping customers at a market-based price set through an auction process. ESP IV also continues the Rider DCR, which supports continued investment related to the distribution system for the benefit of customers, with increased revenue caps of $20 million per year from June 1, 2019 through May 31, 2022; and $15 million per year from June 1, 2022 through May 31, 2024. In addition, ESP IV includes: (1) continuation of a base distribution rate freeze through May 31, 2024; (2) a goal across FirstEnergy to reduce CO2 emissions by 90% below 2005 levels by 2045; and (3) contributions, totaling $51 million to: (a) fund energy conservation programs, economic development and job retention in the Ohio Companies’ service territories; (b) establish a fuel-fund in each of the Ohio Companies’ service territories to assist low-income customers; and (c) establish a Customer Advisory Council to ensure preservation and growth of the competitive market in Ohio.On April 5, 2023, the Ohio Companies filed an application with the PUCO for approval of ESP V, for an eight-year term beginning June 1, 2024, and continuing through May 31, 2032. ESP V proposes to continue providing power to non-shopping customers at market-based prices set through an auction process, with process enhancements designed to reduce costs to customers. ESP V also proposes to continue riders supporting investment in the Ohio Companies’ distribution system, including Rider DCR with annual revenue cap increases of $15 to $21 million per year, based on reliability performance, and Rider AMI for recovery of approved grid modernization investments. ESP V proposes new riders to support continued maintenance of the distribution system, including vegetation management and storm restoration operating expense. In addition, ESP V proposes four-year energy efficiency and peak demand reduction programs for residential and commercial customers, with cost recovery spread over eight years. ESP V further includes a commitment to spend $52 million in total over the eight-year term, without recovery from customers, on initiatives to assist low-income customers, education and incentives to help ensure customers have good experiences with electric vehicles, as well as investment in energy storage as a distribution asset if the Ohio Companies’ application to the DOE for funding under the Grid Innovation Program of the federal Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act is accepted. On May 16, 2022, the Ohio Companies filed their application for determination of the existence of SEET under ESP IV for calendar year 2021, which demonstrated that each of the individual Ohio Companies did not have significantly excessive earnings.On July 15, 2022, the Ohio Companies filed an application with the PUCO for approval of phase two of their distribution grid modernization plan that would, among other things, provide for the installation of an additional 700 thousand smart meters, distribution automation equipment on approximately 240 distribution circuits, voltage regulating equipment on approximately 220 distribution circuits, and other investments and pilot programs in related technologies designed to provide enhanced customer benefits. The Ohio Companies propose that phase two will be implemented over a four-year budget period with estimated capital investments of approximately $626 million and operations and maintenance expenses of approximately $144 million over the deployment period. Under the proposal, costs of phase two of the grid modernization plan would be recovered through the Ohio Companies’ AMI rider, pursuant to the terms and conditions approved in ESP IV. On December 27, 2022, the Ohio Companies filed a motion with the PUCO requesting a procedural schedule that would facilitate the issuance of an order by year-end 2023. On September 8, 2020, the OCC filed motions in the Ohio Companies’ corporate separation audit and DMR audit dockets, requesting the PUCO to open an investigation and management audit, hire an independent auditor, and require FirstEnergy to show it did not improperly use money collected from consumers or violate any utility regulatory laws, rules or orders in its activities regarding HB 6. On December 30, 2020, in response to the OCC's motion, the PUCO reopened the DMR audit docket, and directed PUCO staff to solicit a third-party auditor and conduct a full review of the DMR to ensure funds collected from customers through the DMR were only used for the purposes established in ESP IV. On June 2, 2021, the PUCO selected an auditor and the auditor filed the final audit report on January 14, 2022, which made certain findings and recommendations. The report found that spending of DMR revenues was not required to be tracked, and that DMR revenues, like all rider revenues, are placed into the regulated money pool as a matter of routine, where the funds lose their identity. Therefore, the report could not suggest that DMR funds were used definitively for direct or indirect support for grid modernization. The report also concluded that there was no documented evidence that ties revenues from the DMR to lobbying for the passage of HB 6, but also could not rule out with certainty uses of DMR funds to support the passage of HB 6. The report further recommended that the regulated companies' money pool be audited more frequently and the Ohio Companies adopt formal dividend policies. Final comments and responses were filed by parties during the second quarter of 2022.On September 15, 2020, the PUCO opened a new proceeding to review the political and charitable spending by the Ohio Companies in support of HB 6 and the subsequent referendum effort, and directing the Ohio Companies to show cause, demonstrating that the costs of any political or charitable spending in support of HB 6, or the subsequent referendum effort, were not included, directly or indirectly, in any rates or charges paid by customers. The Ohio Companies initially filed a response stating that the costs of any political or charitable spending in support of HB 6, or the subsequent referendum effort, were not included, directly or indirectly, in any rates or charges paid by customers, but on August 6, 2021, filed a supplemental response explaining that, in light of the facts set forth in the DPA and the findings of the Rider DCR audit report further discussed below, political or charitable spending in support of HB 6, or the subsequent referendum effort, affected pole attachment rates paid by approximately $15 thousand. On October 26, 2021, the OCC filed a motion requesting the PUCO to order an independent external audit to investigate FE’s political and charitable spending related to HB 6, and to appoint an independent review panel to retain and oversee the auditor. In November and December 2021, parties filed comments and reply comments regarding the Ohio Companies’ original and supplemental responses to the PUCO’s September 15, 2020, show cause directive. On May 4, 2022, the PUCO selected a third-party auditor to determine whether the show cause demonstration submitted by the Ohio Companies is sufficient to ensure that the cost of any political or charitable spending in support of HB 6 or the subsequent referendum effort was not included, directly or indirectly, in any rates or charges paid by ratepayers.In connection with an ongoing audit of the Ohio Companies’ policies and procedures relating to the code of conduct rules between affiliates, on November 4, 2020, the PUCO initiated an additional corporate separation audit as a result of the FirstEnergy leadership transition announcement made on October 29, 2020, as further discussed below. The additional audit is to ensure compliance by the Ohio Companies and their affiliates with corporate separation laws and the Ohio Companies’ corporate separation plan. The additional audit is for the period from November 2016 through October 2020. The final audit report was filed on September 13, 2021. The audit report makes no findings of major non-compliance with Ohio corporate separation requirements, minor non-compliance with eight requirements, and findings of compliance with 23 requirements. Parties filed comments and reply comments on the audit report.In connection with an ongoing annual audit of the Ohio Companies’ Rider DCR for 2020, and as a result of disclosures in FirstEnergy’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 (filed on February 18, 2021), the PUCO expanded the scope of the audit on March 10, 2021, to include a review of certain transactions that were either improperly classified, misallocated, or lacked supporting documentation, and to determine whether funds collected from customers were used to pay the vendors, and if so, whether or not the funds associated with those payments should be returned to customers through Rider DCR or through an alternative proceeding. On August 3, 2021, the auditor filed its final report on this phase of the audit, and the parties submitted comments and reply comments on this audit report in October 2021. Additionally, on September 29, 2021, the PUCO expanded the scope of the audit in this proceeding to determine if the costs of the naming rights for FirstEnergy Stadium have been recovered from the Ohio Companies’ customers. On November 19, 2021, the auditor filed its final report, in which the auditor concluded that the FirstEnergy Stadium naming rights expenses were not recovered from Ohio customers. On December 15, 2021, the PUCO further expanded the scope of the audit to include an investigation into an apparent nondisclosure of a side agreement in the Ohio Companies’ ESP IV settlement proceedings, but stayed its expansion of the audit until otherwise ordered by the PUCO.On August 16, 2022, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Ohio requested that the PUCO stay the above pending HB 6- related matters for a period of six months, which request was granted by the PUCO on August 24, 2022. Unless otherwise ordered by the PUCO, the four cases are stayed in their entirety, including discovery and motions, and all related procedural schedules are vacated. On February 22, 2023, the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Ohio again requested that the PUCO stay the above pending HB-6 related matters for a period of six months, which request was granted by the PUCO on March 8, 2023. A rehearing request with respect to the granting of the additional stay is currently pending before the PUCO.In the fourth quarter of 2020, motions were filed with the PUCO requesting that the PUCO amend the Ohio Companies’ riders for collecting the OVEC-related charges required by HB 6 to provide for refunds in the event such provisions of HB 6 are repealed. Neither the Ohio Companies nor FE benefit from the OVEC-related charges the Ohio Companies collect. Instead, the Ohio Companies are further required by HB 6 to remit all the OVEC-related charges they collect to non-FE Ohio electric distribution utilities. The Ohio Companies contested the motions, which are pending before the PUCO.See below for additional details on the government investigations and subsequent litigation surrounding the investigation of HB 6.
The Pennsylvania Companies operate under rates approved by the PPUC, effective as of January 27, 2017. On November 18, 2021, the PPUC issued orders to each of the Pennsylvania Companies directing they operate under DSPs for the June 1, 2019 through May 31, 2023 delivery period, which DSPs provide for the competitive procurement of generation supply for customers who do not receive service from an alternative EGS. Under the 2019-2023 DSPs, supply will be provided by wholesale suppliers through a mix of 3, 12 and 24-month energy contracts, as well as two RFPs for 2-year SREC contracts for ME, PN and Penn. On December 14, 2021, the Pennsylvania Companies filed proposed DSPs for provision of generation for the June 1, 2023 through May 31, 2027 delivery period, to be sourced through competitive procurements for customers who do not receive service from an alternative EGS. An evidentiary hearing was held on April 13, 2022, and on April 20, 2022, the parties filed a partial settlement with the PPUC resolving certain of the issues in the proceeding and setting aside the remainder of the issues to be resolved through briefing. The PPUC approved the partial settlement, without modification, on August 4, 2022. Under the 2023-2027 DSPs, supply is proposed to be provided through a mix of 12 and 24-month energy contracts, as well as long-term solar PPAs.Pursuant to Pennsylvania Act 129 of 2008 and PPUC orders, the Pennsylvania Companies implemented energy efficiency and peak demand reduction programs with demand reduction targets, relative to 2007 to 2008 peak demands, at 2.9% MW for ME, 3.3% MW for PN, 2.0% MW for Penn, and 2.5% MW for WP; and energy consumption reduction targets, as a percentage of the Pennsylvania Companies’ historic 2009 to 2010 reference load at 3.1% MWH for ME, 3.0% MWH for PN, 2.7% MWH for Penn, and 2.4% MWH for WP. Pennsylvania EDCs are permitted to seek PPUC approval of an LTIIP for infrastructure improvements and costs related to highway relocation projects, after which a DSIC may be approved to recover LTIIP costs. On January 16, 2020, the PPUC approved the Pennsylvania Companies’ LTIIPs for the five-year period beginning January 1, 2020 and ending December 31, 2024 for a total capital investment of approximately $572 million for certain infrastructure improvement initiatives. On June 25, 2021, the Pennsylvania Office of Consumer Advocate filed a complaint against Penn’s quarterly DSIC rate, disputing the recoverability of the Companies’ automated distribution management system investment under the DSIC mechanism. On January 26, 2022, the parties filed a joint petition for settlement that resolves all issues in this matter, which was approved by the PPUC without modification on April 14, 2022.Following the Pennsylvania Companies’ 2016 base rate proceedings, the PPUC ruled in a separate proceeding related to the DSIC mechanisms that the Pennsylvania Companies were not required to reflect federal and state income tax deductions related to DSIC-eligible property in DSIC rates. The decision was appealed to the Pennsylvania Supreme Court and in July 2021 the court upheld the Pennsylvania Commonwealth Court’s reversal of the PPUC’s decision and remanded the matter back to the PPUC for determination as to how DSIC calculations shall account for accumulated deferred income taxes and state taxes. The PPUC issued the order as directed. On March 6, 2023, FirstEnergy filed applications with the PPUC, NYPSC and FERC seeking approval to consolidate the Pennsylvania Companies into a new, single operating entity. The PA Consolidation includes, among other steps: (a) the transfer of certain Pennsylvania-based transmission assets owned by WP to KATCo, (b) the contribution of Class B equity interests of MAIT currently held by PN and ME to FE (and ultimately transferred to FET as part of the FET Minority Equity Interest Sale), (c) the formation of FE PA and (d) the merger of each of the Pennsylvania Companies with and into FE PA, with FE PA surviving such mergers as the successor-in-interest to all assets and liabilities of the Pennsylvania Companies. Following completion of the PA Consolidation, FE PA will be FE’s only regulated utility in Pennsylvania encompassing the retail utility operations previously conducted individually by the Pennsylvania Companies. Consummation of the PA Consolidation is contingent upon numerous conditions, including the approval of NYPSC, PPUC and FERC. On April 25, 2023, the PPUC’s presiding officers held a prehearing conference, which, among other things, set evidentiary hearings on August 10 and 11, 2023. Subject to receipt of all regulatory approvals, FirstEnergy expects that the PA Consolidation will close by early 2024.
MP and PE provide electric service to all customers through traditional cost-based, regulated utility ratemaking and operate under WVPSC-approved rates that became effective in February 2015. MP and PE recover net power supply costs, including fuel costs, purchased power costs and related expenses, net of related market sales revenue through the ENEC. MP’s and PE’s ENEC rate is updated annually.On August 25, 2022, MP and PE filed with the WVPSC their annual ENEC case requesting an increase in ENEC rates of $183.8 million beginning January 1, 2023, which represents a 12.2% increase to the rates then in effect. The increase was driven by an underrecovery during the review period (July 1, 2021, to June 30, 2022) of approximately $145 million due to higher coal, reagent, and emission allowance expenses. This filing additionally addresses, among other things, the WVPSC’s May 2022 request for a prudence review of current rates. At a hearing on December 8, 2022, the parties in the case presented a unanimous settlement to increase rates by approximately $92 million, effective January 1, 2023, and carry over to MP and PE’s 2023 ENEC case, approximately $92 million at a carrying charge of 4%. In an order dated December 30, 2022, the WVPSC approved the settlement with respect to the proposed rate increase, but MP and PE rates remain subject to a prudence review in their 2023 ENEC case. The order also instructed MP to evaluate the feasibility of purchasing the 1,200 MW Pleasants Power Station and file a summary of the evaluation, which MP and PE filed on March 31, 2023. Among other things, the filing by MP and PE, noted that the final analysis to determine if the proposed transaction would be in the best interests of MP, PE and their customers would not be complete before the currently scheduled date for Pleasants Power Station to close, proposed an interim solution to preserve Pleasants’ operations while MP and PE completed their analysis, and outlined certain WVPSC actions needed to facilitate the interim solution, including a temporary surcharge for costs to preserve its operations. Based on the WVPSC procedural order, comments were filed on April 14, 2023, a public hearing was held on April 20, 2023, and an evidentiary hearing occurred on April 21, 2023. On April 24, 2023, the WVPSC issued an order approving MP and PE’s interim solution request, authorizing negotiations with the owner of Pleasants for a letter of intent, the terms of which will provide, among other things, for the reimbursement of certain expenses necessary to keep Pleasants in operating condition, and directing MP and PE to file the letter of intent for approval with the WVPSC.  Should the WVPSC approve the letter of intent, it is expected that MP and PE will be permitted to establish a surcharge to recover the costs incurred under the letter of intent.  Also, MP and PE indicated that if a reasonable agreement cannot be reached, they will notify the WVPSC.  The WVPSC requested an update by May 24, 2023.On November 22, 2021, MP and PE filed with the WVPSC their plan to construct 50 MWs of solar generation at five sites in West Virginia. The plan includes a tariff to offer solar power to West Virginia customers and cost recovery for MP and PE from other customers through a surcharge for any solar investment not fully subscribed by their customers. A hearing was held in mid-March 2022 and on April 21, 2022, the WVPSC issued an order approving, effective May 1, 2022, the requested tariff and requiring MP and PE to subscribe at least 85% of the planned 50 MWs before seeking final tariff approval. MP and PE must seek separate approval from the WVPSC to recover any solar generation costs in excess of the approved tariff. On April 24, 2023, MP and PE sought final tariff approval from the WVPSC for three of the five solar sites, representing 30 MWs of generation, and requested approval of a surcharge to recover any costs above the final approved tariff. The first solar generation site is expected to be in-service by the end of 2023 and all construction completed at the other sites no later than the end of 2025 at a total investment cost of approximately $110 million. On January 13, 2023, MP and PE filed a request with the WVPSC seeking approval of new depreciation rates for existing and future capital assets. Specifically, MP and PE are seeking to increase depreciation expense by $75.5 million per year, primarily for regulated generation-related assets. Any depreciation rates approved by the WVPSC would not become effective until new base rates were established. Evidentiary hearings have been set for August 23-25, 2023.On March 2, 2023, the WVPSC ordered MP and PE to conduct a focused audit of the lobbying and image building expenses, including those related to HB 6, incurred by MP and PE from 2018 to 2022 and expenses included in the ENEC during the same time period. The WVPSC’s order also requires MP and PE to review and report on the findings set forth in the FERC Audit described below. The audit is expected to begin in June 2023. See “Outlook - Environmental Matters - Clean Water Act" below, for additional details on the EPA's ELG.
Under the Federal Power Act, FERC regulates rates for interstate wholesale sales and transmission of electric power, regulatory accounting and reporting under the Uniform System of Accounts, and other matters, including construction and operation of hydroelectric projects. With respect to their wholesale services and rates, the Utilities, AE Supply and the Transmission Companies are subject to regulation by FERC. FERC regulations require JCP&L, MP, PE, WP and the Transmission Companies to provide open access transmission service at FERC-approved rates, terms and conditions. Transmission facilities of JCP&L, MP, PE, WP and the Transmission Companies are subject to functional control by PJM and transmission service using their transmission facilities is provided by PJM under the PJM Tariff. FERC regulates the sale of power for resale in interstate commerce in part by granting authority to public utilities to sell wholesale power at market-based rates upon showing that the seller cannot exert market power in generation or transmission or erect barriers to entry into markets. The Utilities and AE Supply each have been authorized by FERC to sell wholesale power in interstate commerce at market-based rates and have a market-based rate tariff on file with FERC, although in the case of the Utilities major wholesale purchases remain subject to review and regulation by the relevant state commissions.Federally enforceable mandatory reliability standards apply to the bulk electric system and impose certain operating, record-keeping and reporting requirements on the Utilities, AE Supply, and the Transmission Companies. NERC is the Electric Reliability Organization designated by FERC to establish and enforce these reliability standards, although NERC has delegated day-to-day implementation and enforcement of these reliability standards to six regional entities, including RFC. All of the facilities that FirstEnergy operates are located within the RFC region. FirstEnergy actively participates in the NERC and RFC stakeholder processes, and otherwise monitors and manages its companies in response to the ongoing development, implementation and enforcement of the reliability standards implemented and enforced by RFC. FirstEnergy believes that it is in material compliance with all currently effective and enforceable reliability standards. Nevertheless, in the course of operating its extensive electric utility systems and facilities, FirstEnergy occasionally learns of isolated facts or circumstances that could be interpreted as excursions from the reliability standards. If and when such occurrences are found, FirstEnergy develops information about the occurrence and develops a remedial response to the specific circumstances, including in appropriate cases “self-reporting” an occurrence to RFC. Moreover, it is clear that NERC, RFC and FERC will continue to refine existing reliability standards as well as to develop and adopt new reliability standards. Any inability on FirstEnergy’s part to comply with the reliability standards for its bulk electric system could result in the imposition of financial penalties, or obligations to upgrade or build transmission facilities, that could have a material adverse effect on its financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
FERC’s Division of Audits and Accounting initiated a nonpublic audit of FESC in February 2019. Among other matters, the audit is evaluating FirstEnergy’s compliance with certain accounting and reporting requirements under various FERC regulations. On February 4, 2022, FERC filed the final audit report for the period of January 1, 2015 through September 30, 2021, which included several findings and recommendations that FirstEnergy has accepted. The audit report included a finding and related recommendation on FirstEnergy’s methodology for allocation of certain corporate support costs to regulatory capital accounts under certain FERC regulations and reporting. Effective in the first quarter of 2022 and in response to the finding, FirstEnergy had implemented a new methodology for the allocation of these corporate support costs to regulatory capital accounts for its regulated distribution and transmission companies on a prospective basis. With the assistance of an independent outside firm, FirstEnergy completed an analysis during the third quarter of 2022 of these costs and how it impacted certain FERC-jurisdictional wholesale transmission customer rates for the audit period of 2015 through 2021. As a result of this analysis, FirstEnergy recorded in the third quarter of 2022 approximately $45 million ($34 million after-tax) in expected customer refunds, plus interest, due to its wholesale transmission customers and reclassified approximately $195 million of certain transmission capital assets to operating expenses for the audit period, of which $90 million ($67 million after-tax) are not expected to be recoverable and impacted FirstEnergy’s earnings since they relate to costs capitalized during stated transmission rate time periods. These reclassifications also resulted in a reduction to the Regulated Transmission segment’s rate base by approximately $160 million, which is not expected to materially impact FirstEnergy or the segment’s future earnings. The expected wholesale transmission customer refunds were recognized as a reduction to revenue, and the amount of reclassified transmission capital assets that are not expected to be recoverable were recognized within “Other operating expenses” at the Regulated Transmission segment and on FirstEnergy’s Consolidated Statements of Income.
On February 24, 2022, the OCC filed a complaint with FERC against ATSI, AEP’s Ohio affiliates and AEPSC, and Duke Energy Ohio, LLC asserting that FERC should reduce the ROE utilized in the utilities’ transmission formula rates by eliminating the 50 basis point adder associated with RTO membership, effective February 24, 2022. The OCC contends that this result is required because Ohio law mandates that transmission owning utilities join an RTO and that the 50 basis point adder is applicable only where RTO membership is voluntary. ATSI disagrees with the OCC’s characterization and set forth its reasons for such disagreement in a combined motion to dismiss and answer that was filed with FERC on March 31, 2022. On that same date, AEP and Duke filed separate motions to dismiss and answers to the OCC complaint, and several other parties filed comments. ATSI filed a response to certain intervenors’ filings on April 28, 2022. On December 15, 2022, FERC denied the complaint as to ATSI and Duke, but granted it as to AEP. On January 17, 2023, AEP and the OCC filed requests for rehearing, which were denied by FERC in orders dated February 17, and April 20, 2023. AEP and OCC have filed appeals of FERC’s orders in the Sixth Circuit. FirstEnergy is unable to predict the outcome of this proceeding, but it is not expected to have a material impact.
On March 20, 2020, FERC initiated a rulemaking proceeding on the transmission rate incentives provisions of Section 219 of the 2005 Energy Policy Act. FirstEnergy submitted comments through the Edison Electric Institute and as part of a consortium of PJM Transmission Owners. In a supplemental rulemaking proceeding that was initiated on April 15, 2021, FERC requested comments on, among other things, whether to require utilities that have been members of an RTO for three years or more and that have been collecting an “RTO membership” ROE incentive adder to file tariff updates that would terminate collection of the incentive adder. Initial comments on the proposed rule were filed on June 25, 2021, and reply comments were filed on July 26, 2021. The rulemaking remains pending before FERC. FirstEnergy is a member of PJM and its transmission subsidiaries could be affected by the supplemental proposed rule. FirstEnergy participated in comments on the supplemental rulemaking that were submitted by a group of PJM transmission owners and by various industry trade groups. If there were to be any changes to FirstEnergy's transmission incentive ROE, such changes will be applied on a prospective basis.
On October 29, 2020, MP, PE and WP filed tariff amendments with FERC to implement a forward-looking formula transmission rate, to be effective January 1, 2021. In addition, on October 30, 2020, KATCo filed a proposed new tariff to establish a forward-looking formula rate and requested that the new rate become effective January 1, 2021. In its filing, KATCo explained that while it currently owns no transmission assets, it may build new transmission facilities in the Allegheny zone, and that it may seek required state and federal authorizations to acquire transmission assets from PE and WP by January 1, 2022. These transmission rate filings were accepted for filing by FERC on December 31, 2020, effective January 1, 2021, subject to refund, pending further hearing and settlement procedures and were consolidated into a single proceeding. MP, PE and WP, and KATCo filed uncontested settlement agreements with FERC on January 18, 2023. There is no timetable for FERC to rule on the settlement agreements. Also on January 18, 2023, MP, PE and WP filed a motion for interim rates to implement certain aspects of the settled rate. The interim rates were approved by the FERC Chief Administrative Law Judge and took effect on January 1, 2023. As a result of the filed settlement, FirstEnergy recognized a $25 million pre-tax charge during the fourth quarter of 2022, which reflects the difference between amounts originally recorded as assets and amounts which will ultimately be recovered from customers as a result of the pending settlement.
Various federal, state and local authorities regulate FirstEnergy with regard to air and water quality, hazardous and solid waste disposal, and other environmental matters. While FirstEnergy’s environmental policies and procedures are designed to achieve compliance with applicable environmental laws and regulations, such laws and regulations are subject to periodic review and potential revision by the implementing agencies. FirstEnergy cannot predict the timing or ultimate outcome of any of these reviews or how any future actions taken as a result thereof may materially impact its business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition.
FirstEnergy complies with SO2 and NOx emission reduction requirements under the CAA and SIP by burning lower-sulfur fuel, utilizing combustion controls and post-combustion controls and/or using emission allowances.CSAPR requires reductions of NOx and SO2 emissions in two phases (2015 and 2017), ultimately capping SO2 emissions in affected states to 2.4 million tons annually and NOx emissions to 1.2 million tons annually. CSAPR allows trading of NOx and SO2 emission allowances between power plants located in the same state and interstate trading of NOx and SO2 emission allowances with some restrictions. On July 28, 2015, the D.C. Circuit ordered the EPA to reconsider the CSAPR caps on NOx and SO2 emissions from power plants in 13 states, including West Virginia. This followed the 2014 U.S. Supreme Court ruling generally upholding the EPA’s regulatory approach under CSAPR but questioning whether the EPA required upwind states to reduce emissions by more than their contribution to air pollution in downwind states. The EPA issued a CSAPR Update on September 7, 2016, reducing summertime NOx emissions from power plants in 22 states in the eastern U.S., including West Virginia, beginning in 2017. Various states and other stakeholders appealed the CSAPR Update to the D.C. Circuit in November and December 2016. On September 13, 2019, the D.C. Circuit remanded the CSAPR Update to the EPA citing that the rule did not eliminate upwind states’ significant contributions to downwind states’ air quality attainment requirements within applicable attainment deadlines. Also in March 2018, the State of New York filed a CAA Section 126 petition with the EPA alleging that NOx emissions from nine states (including West Virginia) significantly contribute to New York’s inability to attain the ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards. The petition sought suitable emission rate limits for large stationary sources that are allegedly affecting New York’s air quality within the three years allowed by CAA Section 126. On September 20, 2019, the EPA denied New York’s CAA Section 126 petition. On October 29, 2019, the State of New York appealed the denial of its petition to the D.C. Circuit. On July 14, 2020, the D.C. Circuit reversed and remanded the New York petition to the EPA for further consideration. On March 15, 2021, the EPA issued a revised CSAPR Update that addressed, among other things, the remands of the prior CSAPR Update and the New York Section 126 petition. In December 2021, MP purchased NOx emissions allowances to comply with 2021 ozone season requirements. On April 6, 2022, the EPA published proposed rules seeking to impose further significant reductions in EGU NOx emissions in 25 upwind states, including West Virginia, with the stated purpose of allowing downwind states to attain or maintain compliance with the 2015 ozone National Ambient Air Quality Standards. On March 15, 2023, the EPA released a pre-publication version of the final rule, which would become effective 60 days after publication in the Federal Register. Depending on the outcome of any appeals and how the EPA and the states ultimately implement the final rule, the future cost of compliance may materially impact FirstEnergy’s operations, cash flows and financial condition.
In September 2016, the U.S. joined in adopting the agreement reached on December 12, 2015, at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change meetings in Paris to reduce GHGs. The Paris Agreement’s non-binding obligations to limit global warming to below two degrees Celsius became effective on November 4, 2016. On June 1, 2017, the Trump Administration announced that the U.S. would cease all participation in the Paris Agreement. On January 20, 2021, President Biden signed an executive order re-adopting the agreement on behalf of the U.S. There are several initiatives to reduce GHG emissions at the state, federal and international level. Certain northeastern states are participating in the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and western states led by California, have implemented programs, primarily cap and trade mechanisms, to control emissions of certain GHGs. Additional policies reducing GHG emissions, such as demand reduction programs, renewable portfolio standards and renewable subsidies have been implemented across the nation. FirstEnergy has pledged to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 and set an interim goal for a 30% reduction in GHGs within FirstEnergy’s direct operational control (Scope 1) by 2030, based on 2019 levels. Future resource plans to achieve carbon reductions, including potential changes in operations or any determination of retirement dates of the regulated coal-fired generating facilities, will be subject to the West Virginia legislation effective March 7, 2023, which requires prior approval from the West Virginia Public Energy Authority to decommission MP’s generating facilities, and may also be impacted by the potential acquisition of the Pleasants Power Station. FirstEnergy will work collaboratively with regulators in West Virginia to achieve its climate goals. Determination of the useful life of the regulated coal-fired generation could result in changes in depreciation, and/or continued collection of net plant in rates after retirement, securitization, sale, impairment, or regulatory disallowances. If MP is unable to recover these costs, it could have a material adverse effect on FirstEnergy’s and/or MP’s financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow. Furthermore, FirstEnergy cannot currently estimate the financial impact of climate change policies, although potential legislative or regulatory programs restricting CO2 emissions, or litigation alleging damages from GHG emissions, could require material capital and other expenditures or result in changes to its operations.In December 2009, the EPA released its final “Endangerment and Cause or Contribute Findings for GHGs under the Clean Air Act,” concluding that concentrations of several key GHGs constitute an “endangerment” and may be regulated as “air pollutants” under the CAA and mandated measurement and reporting of GHG emissions from certain sources, including electric generating plants. Subsequently, the EPA released its final CPP regulations in August 2015 to reduce CO2 emissions from existing fossil fuel-fired EGUs and finalized separate regulations imposing CO2 emission limits for new, modified, and reconstructed fossil fuel-fired EGUs. Numerous states and private parties filed appeals and motions to stay the CPP with the D.C. Circuit in October 2015. On February 9, 2016, the U.S. Supreme Court stayed the rule during the pendency of the challenges to the D.C. Circuit and U.S. Supreme Court. On March 28, 2017, an executive order, entitled “Promoting Energy Independence and Economic Growth,” instructed the EPA to review the CPP and related rules addressing GHG emissions and suspend, revise or rescind the rules if appropriate. On June 19, 2019, the EPA repealed the CPP and replaced it with the ACE rule that established guidelines for states to develop standards of performance to address GHG emissions from existing coal-fired generation. On January 19, 2021, the D.C. Circuit vacated and remanded the ACE rule declaring that the EPA was “arbitrary and capricious” in its rule making and, as such, the ACE rule is no longer in effect and all actions thus far taken by states to implement the federally mandated rule are now null and void. Vacating the ACE rule had the unintended effect of reinstating the CPP because the repeal of the CPP was a provision within the ACE rule. The D.C. Circuit decision was appealed by several states and interested parties, including West Virginia, arguing that the EPA did not have the authorization under Section 111(d) of the CAA to require “generation shifting” as a way to limit GHGs. On June 30, 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the EPA’s regulation of GHGs under Section 111(d) of the CAA (the CPP) was not authorized by Congress and remanded the rule to the EPA for further reconsideration.
Various water quality regulations, the majority of which are the result of the federal Clean Water Act and its amendments, apply to FirstEnergy’s facilities. In addition, the states in which FirstEnergy operates have water quality standards applicable to FirstEnergy’s operations. On September 30, 2015, the EPA finalized new, more stringent effluent limits for the Steam Electric Power Generating category (40 CFR Part 423) for arsenic, mercury, selenium and nitrogen for wastewater from wet scrubber systems and zero discharge of pollutants in ash transport water. The treatment obligations were to phase-in as permits are renewed on a five-year cycle from 2018 to 2023. However, on April 13, 2017, the EPA granted a Petition for Reconsideration and on September 18, 2017, the EPA postponed certain compliance deadlines for two years. On August 31, 2020, the EPA issued a final rule revising the effluent limits for discharges from wet scrubber systems, retaining the zero-discharge standard for ash transport water, (with some limited discharge allowances), and extending the deadline for compliance to December 31, 2025 for both. In addition, the EPA allows for less stringent limits for sub-categories of generating units based on capacity utilization, flow volume from the scrubber system, and unit retirement date. On March 29, 2023, the EPA published proposed revised ELGs applicable to coal-fired power plants that include more stringent effluent limitations for wet scrubber systems and ash transport water, and new limits on landfill leachate. Public hearings on the proposed rules will be held in April 2023 and comments will be accepted through May 30, 2023. In the interim, the rule issued on August 31, 2020, remains in effect. Depending on the outcome of appeals and how final rules are ultimately implemented, compliance with these standards, could require additional capital expenditures or changes in operation at the Ft. Martin and Harrison power stations from what was approved by the WVPSC in September 2022 to comply with the 2020 ELG rule.
Federal and state hazardous waste regulations have been promulgated as a result of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and the Toxic Substances Control Act. Certain CCRs, such as coal ash, were exempted from hazardous waste disposal requirements pending the EPA’s evaluation of the need for future regulation.In April 2015, the EPA finalized regulations for the disposal of CCRs (non-hazardous), establishing national standards for landfill design, structural integrity design and assessment criteria for surface impoundments, groundwater monitoring and protection procedures and other operational and reporting procedures to assure the safe disposal of CCRs from electric generating plants. On September 13, 2017, the EPA announced that it would reconsider certain provisions of the final regulations. On July 29, 2020, the EPA published a final rule again revising the date that certain CCR impoundments must cease accepting waste and initiate closure to April 11, 2021. The final rule also allows for an extension of the closure deadline based on meeting identified site-specific criteria. On November 30, 2020, AE Supply submitted a closure deadline extension request to the EPA seeking to extend the cease accepting waste date for the McElroy's Run CCR impoundment facility until 2024, which request is pending technical review by the EPA. AE Supply continues to operate McElroy’s Run as a disposal facility for EH’s Pleasants Power Station.FE or its subsidiaries have been named as potentially responsible parties at waste disposal sites, which may require cleanup under the CERCLA. Allegations of disposal of hazardous substances at historical sites and the liability involved are often unsubstantiated and subject to dispute; however, federal law provides that all potentially responsible parties for a particular site may be liable on a joint and several basis. Environmental liabilities that are considered probable have been recognized on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of March 31, 2023, based on estimates of the total costs of cleanup, FirstEnergy’s proportionate responsibility for such costs and the financial ability of other unaffiliated entities to pay. Total liabilities of approximately $97 million have been accrued through March 31, 2023, of which, approximately $62 million are for environmental remediation of former MGP and gas holder facilities in New Jersey, which are being recovered by JCP&L through a non-bypassable societal benefits charge. FE or its subsidiaries could be found potentially responsible for additional amounts or additional sites, but the loss or range of losses cannot be determined or reasonably estimated at this time.
On July 21, 2020, a complaint and supporting affidavit containing federal criminal allegations were unsealed against the now former Ohio House Speaker Larry Householder and other individuals and entities allegedly affiliated with Mr. Householder. Also, on July 21, 2020, and in connection with the investigation, FirstEnergy received subpoenas for records from the U.S. Attorney’s Office for the Southern District Ohio. FirstEnergy was not aware of the criminal allegations, affidavit or subpoenas before July 21, 2020. On July 21, 2021, FE entered into a three-year DPA with the U.S. Attorney’s Office that, subject to court proceedings, resolves this matter. Under the DPA, FE has agreed to the filing of a criminal information charging FE with one count of conspiracy to commit honest services wire fraud. The DPA requires that FirstEnergy, among other obligations: (i) continue to cooperate with the U.S. Attorney’s Office in all matters relating to the conduct described in the DPA and other conduct under investigation by the U.S. government; (ii) pay a criminal monetary penalty totaling $230 million within sixty days, which shall consist of (x) $115 million paid by FE to the United States Treasury and (y) $115 million paid by FE to the ODSA to fund certain assistance programs, as determined by the ODSA, for the benefit of low-income Ohio electric utility customers; (iii) publish a list of all payments made in 2021 to either 501(c)(4) entities or to entities known by FirstEnergy to be operating for the benefit of a public official, either directly or indirectly, and update the same on a quarterly basis during the term of the DPA; (iv) issue a public statement, as dictated in the DPA, regarding FE’s use of 501(c)(4) entities; and (v) continue to implement and review its compliance and ethics program, internal controls, policies and procedures designed, implemented and enforced to prevent and detect violations of the U.S. laws throughout its operations, and to take certain related remedial measures. The $230 million payment will neither be recovered in rates or charged to FirstEnergy customers nor will FirstEnergy seek any tax deduction related to such payment. The entire amount of the monetary penalty was recognized as expense in the second quarter of 2021 and paid in the third quarter of 2021. Under the terms of the DPA, the criminal information will be dismissed after FirstEnergy fully complies with its obligations under the DPA.
On August 10, 2020, the SEC, through its Division of Enforcement, issued an order directing an investigation of possible securities laws violations by FE, and on September 1, 2020, issued subpoenas to FE and certain FE officers. On April 28, 2021, and July 11, 2022, the SEC issued additional subpoenas to FE, with which FE has complied. While no contingency has been reflected in its consolidated financial statements, FE believes that it is probable that it will incur a loss in connection with the resolution of the SEC investigation. Given the ongoing nature and complexity of the review, inquiries and investigations, FE cannot yet reasonably estimate a loss or range of loss that may arise from the resolution of the SEC investigation.In addition to the subpoenas referenced above under “—United States v. Larry Householder, et. al.” and the SEC investigation, certain FE stockholders and FirstEnergy customers filed several lawsuits against FirstEnergy and certain current and former directors, officers and other employees, and the complaints in each of these suits is related to allegations in the complaint and supporting affidavit relating to HB 6 and the now former Ohio House Speaker Larry Householder and other individuals and entities allegedly affiliated with Mr. Householder. The plaintiffs in each of the below cases seek, among other things, to recover an unspecified amount of damages (unless otherwise noted). Unless otherwise indicated, no contingency has been reflected in FirstEnergy’s consolidated financial statements with respect to these lawsuits as a loss is neither probable, nor is a loss or range of a loss reasonably estimable.•In re FirstEnergy Corp. Securities Litigation (S.D. Ohio); on July 28, 2020 and August 21, 2020, purported stockholders of FE filed putative class action lawsuits alleging violations of the federal securities laws. Those actions have been consolidated and a lead plaintiff, the Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association, has been appointed by the court. A consolidated complaint was filed on February 26, 2021. The consolidated complaint alleges, on behalf of a proposed class of persons who purchased FE securities between February 21, 2017 and July 21, 2020, that FE and certain current or former FE officers violated Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act by issuing misrepresentations or omissions concerning FE’s business and results of operations. The consolidated complaint also alleges that FE, certain current or former FE officers and directors, and a group of underwriters violated Sections 11, 12(a)(2) and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933 as a result of alleged misrepresentations or omissions in connection with offerings of senior notes by FE in February and June 2020. On March 30, 2023, the court granted plaintiffs’ motion for class certification. On April 14, 2023, FE filed a petition in the U.S Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit seeking to appeal that order. FE believes that it is probable that it will incur a loss in connection with the resolution of this lawsuit. Given the ongoing nature and complexity of such litigation, FE cannot yet reasonably estimate a loss or range of loss. •MFS Series Trust I, et al. v. FirstEnergy Corp., et al. and Brighthouse Funds II – MFS Value Portfolio, et al. v. FirstEnergy Corp., et al. (S.D. Ohio) on December 17, 2021 and February 21, 2022, purported stockholders of FE filed complaints against FE, certain current and former officers, and certain current and former officers of EH. The complaints allege that the defendants violated Sections 10(b) and 20(a) of the Exchange Act by issuing alleged misrepresentations or omissions regarding FE’s business and its results of operations, and seek the same relief as the In re FirstEnergy Corp. Securities Litigation described above. FE believes that it is probable that it will incur losses in connection with the resolution of these lawsuits. Given the ongoing nature and complexity of such litigation, FE cannot yet reasonably estimate a loss or range of loss.•State of Ohio ex rel. Dave Yost, Ohio Attorney General v. FirstEnergy Corp., et al. and City of Cincinnati and City of Columbus v. FirstEnergy Corp. (Common Pleas Court, Franklin County, OH, all actions have been consolidated); on September 23, 2020 and October 27, 2020, the OAG and the cities of Cincinnati and Columbus, respectively, filed complaints against several parties including FE, each alleging civil violations of the Ohio Corrupt Activity Act in connection with the passage of HB 6. On January 13, 2021, the OAG filed a motion for a temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction against FirstEnergy seeking to enjoin FirstEnergy from collecting the Ohio Companies' decoupling rider. On January 31, 2021, FE reached a partial settlement with the OAG and the cities of Cincinnati and Columbus with respect to the temporary restraining order and preliminary injunction request and related issues. In connection with the partial settlement, the Ohio Companies filed an application on February 1, 2021, with the PUCO to set their respective decoupling riders (Conservation Support Rider) to zero. On February 2, 2021, the PUCO approved the application of the Ohio Companies setting the rider to zero and no additional customer bills will include new decoupling rider charges after February 8, 2021. On August 13, 2021, new defendants were added to the complaint, including two former officers of FirstEnergy. On December 2, 2021, the cities and FE entered a stipulated dismissal with prejudice of the cities’ suit. The cases had been stayed pending final resolution of the United States v. Larry Householder, et al. criminal proceeding described above. The OAG renewed its earlier motion to lift the agreed-upon stay on March 9, 2023, and in an order dated March 15, 2023, the stay was lifted. On February 9, 2022, FE, acting through the SLC, agreed to a settlement term sheet to resolve the following shareholder derivative lawsuits relating to HB 6 and the now former Ohio House Speaker Larry Householder and other individuals and entities allegedly affiliated with Mr. Householder that were filed in the S.D. Ohio, the N.D. Ohio, and the Ohio Court of Common Pleas, Summit County:•Gendrich v. Anderson, et al. and Sloan v. Anderson, et al. (Common Pleas Court, Summit County, Ohio, all actions have been consolidated); on July 26, 2020 and July 31, 2020, respectively, purported stockholders of FE filed shareholder derivative action lawsuits against certain current and former FE directors and officers, alleging, among other things, breaches of fiduciary duty. •Miller v. Anderson, et al. (N.D. Ohio); Bloom, et al. v. Anderson, et al.; Employees Retirement System of the City of St. Louis v. Jones, et al.; Electrical Workers Pension Fund, Local 103, I.B.E.W. v. Anderson et al.; Massachusetts Laborers Pension Fund v. Anderson et al.; The City of Philadelphia Board of Pensions and Retirement v. Anderson et al.; Atherton v. Dowling et al.; Behar v. Anderson, et al. (S.D. Ohio, all actions have been consolidated); beginning on August 7, 2020, purported stockholders of FE filed shareholder derivative actions alleging the FE Board and officers breached their fiduciary duties and committed violations of Section 14(a) of the Exchange Act.On March 11, 2022, the parties executed a stipulation and agreement of settlement, and filed a motion the same day requesting preliminary settlement approval in the S.D. Ohio, which the S.D. Ohio granted on May 9, 2022. Subsequently, following a hearing on August 4, 2022, the S.D. Ohio granted final approval of the settlement on August 24, 2022. The settlement agreement is expected to resolve fully these shareholder derivative lawsuits and included a series of corporate governance enhancements.The settlement also includes a payment to FE of $180 million, to be paid by insurance after the judgment has become final, less $36 million in court-ordered attorney’s fees awarded to plaintiffs. On September 20, 2022, a purported FE stockholder filed a motion for reconsideration of the S.D. Ohio’s final settlement approval. The parties filed oppositions to that motion on October 11, 2022 and the motion is under consideration by the S.D. Ohio. The N.D. Ohio matter remains pending. On June 2, 2022, the N.D. Ohio entered an order to show cause why the court should not appoint new plaintiffs’ counsel, and thereafter, on June 10, 2022, the parties filed a joint motion to dismiss the matter without prejudice, which the N.D. Ohio denied on July 5, 2022. On August 15, 2022, the N.D. Ohio issued an order stating its intention to appoint one group of applicants as new plaintiffs’ counsel, and on August 22, 2022, the N.D. Ohio ordered that any objections to the appointment be submitted by August 26, 2022. The parties filed their objections by that deadline, and on September 2, 2022, the applicants responded to those objections. In the meantime, on August 25, 2022, a purported FE stockholder represented by the applicants filed a motion to intervene, attaching a proposed complaint-in-intervention purporting to assert claims that the FE Board and officers breached their fiduciary duties and committed violations of Section 14(a) of the Exchange Act as well as a claim against a third party for professional negligence and malpractice. The parties filed oppositions to that motion to intervene on September 8, 2022, and the proposed intervenor's reply in support of his motion to intervene was filed on September 22, 2022.On August 24, 2022, the parties filed a joint motion to dismiss the action pending in the N.D. Ohio based upon and in light of the approval of the settlement by the S.D. Ohio. On August 30, 2022, the parties filed a joint motion to dismiss the state court action, which the court granted on September 2, 2022.In letters dated January 26, and February 22, 2021, staff of FERC's Division of Investigations notified FirstEnergy that the Division is conducting an investigation of FirstEnergy’s lobbying and governmental affairs activities concerning HB 6, and staff directed FirstEnergy to preserve and maintain all documents and information related to the same as such have been developed as part of an ongoing non-public audit being conducted by FERC's Division of Audits and Accounting. On December 30, 2022, FERC approved a Stipulation and Consent Agreement that resolves the investigation. The agreement includes a FirstEnergy admission of violating FERC’s “duty of candor” rule and related laws, and obligates FirstEnergy to pay a civil penalty of $3.86 million, and to submit two annual compliance monitoring reports to FERC’s Office of Enforcement regarding improvements to FirstEnergy’s compliance programs. FE paid the civil penalty on January 4, 2023 and it will not be recovered from customers.The outcome of any of these lawsuits, governmental investigations and audit is uncertain and could have a material adverse effect on FE’s or its subsidiaries’ reputation, business, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and cash flows.
There are various lawsuits, claims (including claims for asbestos exposure) and proceedings related to FirstEnergy’s normal business operations pending against FE or its subsidiaries. The loss or range of loss in these matters is not expected to be material to FE or its subsidiaries. The other potentially material items not otherwise discussed above are described under Note 7, “Regulatory Matters.” FirstEnergy accrues legal liabilities only when it concludes that it is probable that it has an obligation for such costs and can reasonably estimate the amount of such costs. In cases where FirstEnergy determines that it is not probable, but reasonably possible that it has a material obligation, it discloses such obligations and the possible loss or range of loss if such estimate can be made. If it were ultimately determined that FE or its subsidiaries have legal liability or are otherwise made subject to liability based on any of the matters referenced above, it could have a material adverse effect on FE’s or its subsidiaries’ financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows.
See Note 1, "Organization and Basis of Presentation," for a discussion of new accounting pronouncements.