
This report contains certain forward-looking statements that are based on our current views and assumptions regarding future events, future business conditions and the outlook for our company based on currently available information. In some cases, we have identified these forward-looking statements by such words or phrases as "will likely result," "is confident that," "expect," "expects," "should," "could," "may," "will continue to," "believe," "believes," "anticipates," "predicts," "forecasts," "estimates," "projects," "potential," "intends" or similar expressions identifying "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, including the negative of those words or phrases. Such forward-looking statements are based on our current views and assumptions regarding future events, future business conditions and the outlook for the company based on currently available information. The forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause actual results to be materially different from any results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by any forward-looking statement. These statements are qualified by reference to the risk factors included in Part I, Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 (the "2022 Form 10-K"), the section captioned "Forward-Looking Information" in Part II of the 2022 Form 10-K and to similar risk factors and cautionary statements in all other reports and forms filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). Moreover, investors are cautioned to interpret many of these factors as being impacted as a result of the residual adverse impacts of COVID and governmental, business, and societal responses to COVID.  We wish to caution readers not to place undue reliance on any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made.  Forward-looking statements are qualified in their entirety by the above cautionary statement.We specifically decline to undertake any obligation, and specifically disclaims any duty, to publicly revise any forward-looking statements that have been made to reflect events or circumstances after the date of such statements or to reflect the occurrence of anticipated or unanticipated events, except as may be required by law.
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We have described our accounting policies in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in our 2022 Form 10-K. We have reviewed these accounting policies, identifying those that we believe to be critical to the preparation and understanding of our consolidated financial statements. We have reviewed these critical accounting policies with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. Critical accounting policies are central to our presentation of results of operations and financial condition and require management to make estimates and judgments on certain matters. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current conditions and other reasonable factors.The following is a list of those accounting policies that we have deemed most critical to the presentation and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. See the "Critical Accounting Policies" section in our 2022 Form 10-K for a detailed description of these policies and their potential effects on our results of operations and financial condition.•Revenue recognition and trade receivables•Environmental obligations and related recoveries•Impairment and valuation of long-lived assets and indefinite-lived assets•Pensions and other postretirement benefits•Income taxes
See Note 2 to the condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-Q for a discussion of recently adopted accounting guidance and other new accounting guidance.
We are an agricultural sciences company, providing innovative solutions to growers around the world with a robust product portfolio fueled by a market-driven discovery and development pipeline in crop protection, crop enhancement, and professional pest and turf management. We operate in a single distinct business segment. We develop, market and sell all three major classes of crop protection chemicals (insecticides, herbicides and fungicides) as well as biologicals, crop nutrition, and seed treatment products, which we group as plant health. These products are used in agriculture to enhance crop yield and quality by controlling a broad spectrum of insects, weeds and disease, as well as in non-agricultural markets for pest control. This powerful combination of advanced technologies includes leading insect control products based on Rynaxypyr® and Cyazypyr® active ingredients; Authority®, Boral®, Centium®, Command® and Gamit® branded herbicides; Isoflex™ active herbicide ingredient; Talstar® and Hero® branded insecticides; and flutriafol-based fungicides and biologicals such as Quartzo® and Presence® bionematicides as well as crop enhancers such as Accudo®. The FMC portfolio also includes Arc™ farm intelligence.
Current global inflationary pressures have affected our business, primarily due to higher than normal input costs, primarily raw materials, resulting in pressure on our operating margins. Costs impacted by inflation include labor and overhead costs, costs of certain raw materials, freight and logistics costs, tolling services, and equipment costs. We have partially mitigated inflation headwinds through pricing actions, cost saving initiatives, and alternate sourcing options. Costs overall are anticipated to remain a headwind throughout 2023; however, we are seeing deceleration of input cost inflation. We believe input costs could become a tailwind in the second half of 2023.
The following items are the more significant developments or financial highlights in our business during the three months ended March 31, 2023: •Revenue of $1,344.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased $6.5 million, essentially flat versus the same period last year. A more detailed review of revenue is discussed under the section titled "Results of Operations". On a regional basis, sales in North America increased by approximately 28 percent, sales in Latin America decreased approximately 12 percent, sales in Europe, Middle East and Africa decreased approximately 4 percent, and sales in Asia decreased approximately 22 percent. The minor decrease in revenue was mostly driven by  foreign exchange ("FX") and lower volume headwinds partially offset by price movement. Excluding foreign currency impacts, revenue increased 4 percent during the quarter.•Our gross margin of $581.3 million increased versus the prior year quarter by $8.6 million driven by price movement exceeding FX, volume, and cost headwinds as well as growth in new products. Gross margin percent of approximately 43 percent increased compared to approximately 42 percent in the prior year period.•Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased from $188.5 million to $185.9 million, or approximately 1 percent due to continued cost discipline and favorable exchange rates.•Research and development expenses of $78.4 million increased $6.6 million or 9 percent compared to previous year.  The increase in research and development expenditures is related to continued investment in our new active ingredient pipeline as well as inflation and labor cost increases. •Net income (loss) attributable to FMC stockholders decreased from $207.4 million to $196.0 million which represents a decrease of $11.4 million, or approximately 5 percent. Adjusted after-tax earnings from continuing operations attributable to FMC stockholders of $223.1 million decreased compared to the prior year amount of $238.7 million.  Results in the quarter were solid as a result of new products, increased market access and cost discipline.  However, these actions were offset primarily by higher interest costs due to increases in interest rates. See the disclosure of our Adjusted Earnings Non-GAAP financial measurement below, under the section titled "Results of Operations".
We expect 2023 revenue will be in the range of approximately $6.08 billion to $6.22 billion, up approximately 6 percent at the midpoint versus 2022. New launches and market access initiatives are expected to help drive volume growth with mid-single digit pricing expected for the full year. Foreign currency is expected to be a moderate headwind to topline results. We expect adjusted EBITDA(1) of $1.50 billion to $1.56 billion, representing 9 percent growth at the midpoint versus 2022 results.  Price is anticipated to be the primary driver of EBITDA growth in the year with cost headwinds expected to be significantly lower than those experienced last year. Increases in the input cost portion of cost headwinds are anticipated to decelerate as the year progresses and become a year-over-year tailwind in the second half. 2023 adjusted earnings are expected to be in the range of $7.34 to $7.94 per diluted share(1), up approximately 3 percent at the midpoint versus 2022, negatively impacted by higher interest and tax rates. The estimate for adjusted earnings excludes any impact from potential additional share repurchases in 2023. For cash flow outlook, refer to the liquidity and capital resources section below.(1)Although we provide forecasts for adjusted earnings per share and adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP financial measures), we are not able to forecast the most directly comparable measures calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Certain elements of the composition of the U.S. GAAP amounts are not predictable, making it impractical for us to forecast. Such elements include, but are not limited to, restructuring, acquisition charges, and discontinued operations. As a result, no U.S. GAAP outlook is provided.
The following charts provide a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Earnings, and Organic Revenue Growth, all of which are Non-GAAP financial measures, from the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Adjusted EBITDA and Organic Revenue are provided to assist the readers of our financial statements with useful information regarding our operating results. Our operating results are presented based on how we assess operating performance and internally report financial information. For management purposes, we report operating performance based on earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, discontinued operations, and corporate special charges. Our Adjusted Earnings measure excludes corporate special charges, net of income taxes, discontinued operations attributable to FMC stockholders, net of income taxes, and certain Non-GAAP tax adjustments. These are excluded by us in the measure we use to evaluate business performance and determine certain performance-based compensation. Organic Revenue Growth excludes the impacts of foreign currency changes, which we believe is a meaningful metric to evaluate our revenue changes. These items are discussed in detail within the "Other Results of Operations" section that follows. In addition to providing useful information about our operating results to investors, we also believe that excluding the effect of corporate special charges, net of income taxes, and certain Non-GAAP tax adjustments from operating results and discontinued operations allows management and investors to compare more easily the financial performance of our underlying business from period to period. These measures should not be considered as substitutes for net income (loss) or other measures of performance or liquidity reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
(1)Referred to as operating profit.(2)Adjusted EBITDA is defined as operating profit excluding corporate special charges (income) and depreciation and amortization expense.(3)See Note 9 for details of restructuring and other charges (income).(4)Our non-operating pension and postretirement charges (income) are defined as those costs (benefits) related to interest, expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial gains and losses and the impacts of any plan curtailments or settlements. These are excluded from our operating results and are primarily related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial market performance and we consider these costs to be outside our operational performance. We continue to include the service cost and amortization of prior service cost in our operating results noted above. These elements reflect the current year operating costs to our business for the employment benefits provided to active employees.
(1)Represents restructuring and other charges (income), and non-operating pension and postretirement charges (income).(2)The income tax expense (benefit) on corporate special charges (income) is determined using the applicable rates in the taxing jurisdictions in which the corporate special charge (income) occurred and includes both current and deferred income tax expense (benefit) based on the nature of the Non-GAAP performance measure.(3)We exclude the GAAP tax provision, including discrete items, from the Non-GAAP measure of income, and instead include a Non-GAAP tax provision based upon the annual Non-GAAP effective tax rate. The GAAP tax provision includes certain discrete tax items including, but not limited to: income tax expenses or benefits that are not related to current year ongoing business operations; tax adjustments associated with fluctuations in foreign currency remeasurement of certain foreign operations; certain changes in estimates of tax matters related to prior fiscal years; certain changes in the realizability of deferred tax assets; and changes in tax law. Management believes excluding these discrete tax items assists investors and securities analysts in understanding the tax provision and the effective tax rate related to ongoing operations thereby providing investors with useful supplemental information about FMC's operational performance.
In the discussion below, all comparisons are between the periods unless otherwise noted.
Revenue of $1,344.3 million decreased $6.5 million, or essentially flat, versus the prior year period. Favorable pricing actions accounted for an approximate 7 percent increase, which was fully offset by unfavorable foreign currency impacts of approximately 4 percent as well as lower volumes impact of approximately 3 percent. Excluding foreign currency impacts, revenue increased approximately 4 percent.
North America: Revenue increased approximately 28 percent year-over-year growth (up 30 percent organically). Canada doubled first quarter revenue compared to the prior year period driven by market share gains and high customer demand. Product mix in the overall North America region also benefited from higher sales of new products with 29 percent of revenue derived from branded products launched within the last five years, including a significant contribution from the launch of Altacor Evo (based on Rynaxypyr active) for use on tree nuts and other crops. Branded diamides grew more than 20 percent in the quarter.Latin America: Revenue decreased approximately 12 percent versus the first quarter of 2022.  While the region did see prices increase in the quarter, Latin America's volumes were impacted by drought conditions in southern Brazil and Argentina resulting in missed applications. EMEA: Revenue decreased approximately 4 percent, (up 2 percent organically) compared to the prior year period as strong pricing actions mostly offset the headwinds from anticipated registration losses and exiting our Russian operations as well as lower volumes in select markets. FX continued to be a headwind in the region.Asia: Revenue decreased approximately 22 percent (down 15 percent organically) year-over-year due to continued focus on channel inventory reduction in India which was anticipated as well as dry conditions in Australia and New Zealand causing a delay to start of the growing season.
Gross margin of $581.3 million increased $8.6 million, or approximately 2 percent versus the prior year period. The increase was due to lower cost of sales offset partially by lower revenues. Gross margin percent of approximately 43 percent increased compared to approximately 42 percent in the prior year period, driven primarily by higher prices.
Selling, general and administrative expenses of $185.9 million decreased $2.6 million, or 1 percent, versus the prior year period.  This change was not considered material and resulted from the cost discipline in this area as well as favorable exchange rates.
Research and development expenses of $78.4 million increased $6.6 million or 9 percent compared to the previous year. The increase in research and development expenditures is related to continued investment in our new active ingredient pipeline as well as inflation and labor cost increases.
Depreciation and amortization of $44.7 million increased $2.3 million or 5 percent as compared to the prior year period of $42.4 million. The increase was driven by additional assets placed into service during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
Interest expense, net of $51.4 million increased $21.5 million or 72 percent compared to the prior year period of $29.9 million. The increase was primarily driven by higher domestic interest rates increasing interest expense by $19.8 million and higher foreign interest rates and debt balances which increased interest expense by $2.3 million.
Restructuring charges during 2023 of $0.9 million primarily relate to facility exit costs associated with various restructuring initiatives across the globe.Restructuring charges in 2022 of $11.2 million consist of $8.4 million fixed asset and other charges resulting from the closure of certain manufacturing sites during the period. Restructuring charges also include $2.8 million from various restructuring programs.Other charges (income), net in 2023 were $11.6 million. $6.9 million relates to a remeasurement charge resulting from the significant currency depreciation of the Pakistani Rupee. On January 25th, 2023, the Pakistani Rupee experienced its largest single day drop against the US dollar in over two decades following the removal of the USD-PKR exchange cap in place on the country's currency. This action, combined with the decision by Pakistan's central bank to raise interest rates to record highs during the quarter, resulted in the immediate and significant devaluation of the Pakistani Rupee. Additionally, other charges relating to environmental sites of $2.3 million were recognized during the period as well as $2.4 million of other miscellaneous charges.
Charges for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $4.6 million compared to $4.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase in non-operating pension and postretirement charges (income) is attributable to the expected return on plan assets not offsetting interests costs as much as in the prior period due to an increase in rates.
Provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $41.1 million resulting in an effective tax rate of 16.5 percent. Provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was $42.3 million resulting in an effective tax rate of 15.7 percent. The increase in the effective tax rate from GAAP continuing operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 was driven by the factors shown in the table below.
(1)    Refer to Note 3 of the Adjusted Earnings Reconciliation table within this section of this Form 10-Q for an explanation of tax adjustments.
Our discontinued operations include provisions, net of recoveries, for environmental liabilities and legal reserves and expenses related to previously discontinued operations and retained liabilities.Discontinued operations, net of income taxes represented a loss of $11.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to a loss of $15.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The loss during both the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was primarily due to adjustments related to the retained liabilities from our previously discontinued operations.
Net income (loss) decreased to $195.9 million from income of $211.6 million in the prior year period.  Results in the quarter were solid as a result of new products, increased market access and cost discipline.  However, these actions were offset primarily from an increase in interest expense of approximately $21.5 million driven by higher domestic interest rates and higher domestic debt balances.The only difference between Net income (loss) and Net income (loss) attributable to FMC stockholders is noncontrolling interest, which period over period is immaterial.
The Adjusted EBITDA amounts discussed below for three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are reconciled to Net Income (loss) within this Form 10-Q. Refer to our Overview under the section titled "Results of Operations" above.Adjusted EBITDA of $361.7 million increased $6.9 million, or approximately 2 percent versus the prior year period. The increase was due to higher pricing impacting adjusted EBITDA by 27 percent. This more than offset foreign currency fluctuations which had an unfavorable impact of approximately 9 percent, volume decreases of 9 percent and cost increases, primarily attributable to raw materials, which had an unfavorable impact of approximately 8 percent on adjusted EBITDA. For 2023, full-year Adjusted EBITDA is expected to be in the range of $1.50 billion to $1.56 billion, which represents approximately 9 percent growth at the midpoint versus 2022.  Although we provide a forecast for Adjusted EBITDA, a Non-GAAP financial measure, we are not able to forecast the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. See Note 1 to our 2023 Outlook Update within this section of the Form 10-Q.
As a global agricultural sciences company, we require cash primarily for seasonal working capital needs, capital expenditures, and return of capital to shareholders. We plan to meet these liquidity needs through available cash, cash generated from operations, commercial paper issuances and borrowings under our committed revolving credit facility as well as other liquidity facilities, and in certain instances access to debt capital markets. We believe our strong financial standing and credit ratings will ensure adequate access to the debt capital markets on favorable conditions.
Cash and cash equivalents at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, were $494.4 million and $572.0 million, respectively. Of the cash and cash equivalents balance at March 31, 2023, $477.6 million was held by our foreign subsidiaries. We have established plans to repatriate cash from certain foreign subsidiaries with minimal tax on a go forward basis. Other cash held by foreign subsidiaries is generally used to finance subsidiaries’ operating activities and future foreign investments. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements included within our 2022 Form 10-K for more information on our indefinite reinvestment assertion.
At March 31, 2023, we had total debt of $4,212.6 million as compared to $3,274.0 million at December 31, 2022. Total debt included $2,334.0 million and $2,733.2 million of long-term debt (excluding current portions of $490.9 million and $88.5 million) at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Our short-term debt consists of foreign borrowings and borrowings under our commercial paper program. Foreign borrowings increased from $81.8 million at December 31, 2022 to $182.0 million at March 31, 2023 while outstanding commercial paper increased from $370.5 million at December 31, 2022 to $1,205.7 million at March 31, 2023. We provide parent-company guarantees to lending institutions providing credit to our foreign subsidiaries. See Note 10 in the condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-Q for further details. As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants. We remain committed to solid investment grade credit metrics, and expect full-year average leverage to be in line with this commitment in 2023.
At March 31, 2023, our remaining borrowing capacity under our credit facility was $626.9 million. Our commercial paper program allows us to borrow at rates generally more favorable than those available under our credit facility. At March 31, 2023, we had $1,205.7 million commercial paper borrowings under the commercial paper program. At March 31, 2023, the average effective interest rate on the borrowings was 5.76 percent. Our commercial paper balances fluctuate from year to year depending on working capital needs. Based on cash generated from operations, our existing liquidity facilities, which includes the revolving credit agreement with the option to increase capacity up to $2.75 billion, and our continued access to debt capital markets, we have adequate liquidity to meet any of the company's debt obligations in the near term including any current portion of long-term debt.
We offer to a select group of suppliers a voluntary supply chain finance program as part of our continued efforts to improve our working capital efficiency. We do not believe that changes in the availability of the supply chain finance program would have a significant impact on our liquidity. See Note 2 for more information on the key terms and balances of the program.  From time to time, the Company may sell receivables on a non-recourse basis to third-party financial institutions. These sales are normally driven by specific market conditions, including, but not limited to, foreign exchange environments, customer credit management, as well as other factors where the receivables may lay. See Note 6 for more information on receivables factoring.
The table below presents the components of net cash provided (required) by operating activities of continuing operations.
(1)Both periods include the impacts of seasonality and the receivable build intrinsic in our business. The change in cash flows related to trade receivables in 2023 was driven by timing of collections as well as lower volumes for revenue year over year. Collection timing is more pronounced in certain countries such as Brazil where there may be terms significantly longer than the rest of our business. Additionally, timing of collection is impacted as amounts for both periods include carry-over balances remaining to be collected in Latin America, where collection periods are measured in months rather than weeks. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we collected approximately $149 million of receivables in Brazil.(2)Advance payments are primarily within North America and these payments are received in the fourth quarter of each year and recorded as deferred revenue on the balance sheet at December 31. Revenue associated with advance payments is recognized, generally in the first half of each year, as shipments are made and transfer of control to the customer takes place. (3)These rebates are primarily associated within North America, and to a lesser extent Brazil, and in North America generally settle in the fourth quarter of each year given the end of the respective crop cycle. The changes year over year are associated with the mix in sales eligible for rebates and incentives which includes higher revenues for products eligible for rebates compared to the prior year and timing of certain rebate payments.(4)Changes in inventory are a result of inventory levels being adjusted to take into consideration the change in market conditions. Inventory build in 2023 is in line with the projected demand for the year.(5)The change in cash flows related to accounts payable is primarily due to the timing of payments made to suppliers and vendors.(6)Changes in all periods presented primarily represent timing of payments associated with all other operating assets and liabilities. Additionally, for the three months ended March 31, 2022, the changes included the effects of the unfavorable contract amortization of approximately $27 million. The contract expired during the 4th quarter of 2022.(7)See Note 9 in our condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-Q for further details.(8)The amounts represent environmental remediation spending at our operating sites which were recorded against pre-existing reserves, net of recoveries. Refer to Note 12 for more details. (9)There were no voluntary contributions to our U.S. qualified defined benefit plan, which is slightly overfunded, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. (10)Amounts shown in the chart represent net payments of our continuing operations. (11)Represents payments for legal and professional fees associated with integrating the DuPont Crop Protection Business. The integration is complete and the 2022 payments are associated with settlement of final amounts payable to various vendors.
Cash (required) by operating activities of discontinued operations is directly related to environmental, other postretirement benefit liabilities, self-insurance, long-term obligations related to legal proceedings and historical restructuring activities. Period over period the cash flow impacts of these activities were consistent, as expected.
Cash (required) by investing activities of continuing operations during the three months ended March 31, 2023, and March 31, 2022 were relatively consistent. Slightly lower capital expenditures were offset by slightly higher investments made by FMC Ventures during the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022.
Cash provided by financing activities of continuing operations increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in the prior year as a result of higher commercial paper balances and an increase in short term foreign borrowings. This increase was partially offset by $25 million in repurchases of common stock under the publicly announced program. There were no share repurchases during the three months ended March 31, 2022.
We define free cash flow, a Non-GAAP financial measure, as all cash inflows and outflows excluding those related to financing activities (such as debt repayments, dividends, and share repurchases) and acquisition related investing activities. Free cash flow is calculated as all cash from operating activities reduced by spending for capital additions and other investing activities as well as Legacy and transformation spending. Therefore, our calculation of free cash flow will almost always result in a lower amount than cash from operating activities from continuing operations, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure. However, the free cash flow measure is consistent with management's assessment of operating cash flow performance and we believe it provides a useful basis for investors and securities analysts about the cash generated by routine business operations, including capital expenditures, in addition to assessing our ability to repay debt, fund acquisitions including cost and equity method investments, and return capital to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends.Our use of free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for an analysis of our results under U.S. GAAP. First, free cash flow is not a substitute for cash provided (required) by operating activities of continuing operations, as it is not a measure of cash available for discretionary expenditures since we have non-discretionary obligations, primarily debt service, that are not deducted from the measure. Second, other companies may calculate free cash flow or similarly titled Non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of free cash flow as a tool for comparison. Additionally, the utility of free cash flow is further limited as it does not reflect our future contractual commitments and does not represent the total increase or decrease in our cash balance for a given period. Because of these and other limitations, free cash flow should be considered along with cash provided (required) by operating activities of continuing operations and other comparable financial measures prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.The table below presents a reconciliation of free cash flow from the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure:
(1)Represents payments for legal and professional fees associated with integrating the DuPont Crop Protection Business. The integration is now complete with no additional remaining cash spending expected.  (2)Adjusted cash from operations is defined as cash provided (required) by operating activities of continuing operations excluding the effects of transaction-related cash flows, which are included within Legacy and transformation. There are no remaining cash flows expected related to previously incurred transaction costs.(3)Components of cash provided (required) by investing activities of continuing operations. Refer to the below discussion for further details.(4)Included in the amounts is cash spending associated with contract manufacturers of $0.6 million and $1.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(5)Refer to the above discussion for further details.(6)Includes our Legacy liabilities such as environmental remediation and other legal matters that are reported in discontinued operations as well as business integration costs associated with the DuPont Crop Protection Business Acquisition and the implementation of our new SAP system which were completed in prior years.
Our cash needs for 2023 include operating cash requirements (particularly working capital, as well as environmental, asset retirement obligation, and restructuring spending), capital expenditures, and Legacy and transformation spending, as well as mandatory payments of debt, dividend payments, and share repurchases. We plan to meet our liquidity needs through available cash, cash generated from operations, commercial paper issuances and borrowings under our committed revolving credit facility. At March 31, 2023, our remaining borrowing capacity under our credit facility was $626.9 million. We expect 2023 free cash flow (Non-GAAP) to fall within a range of approximately $530 million to $720 million. At the mid-point of the range there is an increase year over year driven by higher adjusted cash from operations primarily due to growth in adjusted EBITDA and slower growth of working capital from slower sales growth and easing input cost inflation which will be partially offset by higher cash interest and taxes. We expect a modest year over year increase in capital additions as we expand capacity to meet growing demand, especially for our new products.Although we provide a forecast for free cash flow, a Non-GAAP financial measure, we are not able to forecast the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which is cash provided (required) by operating activities of continuing operations. Certain elements of the composition of the U.S. GAAP amount are not predictable, making it impractical for us to forecast. Such elements include, but are not limited to, restructuring, acquisition charges, and discontinued operations. As a result, no U.S. GAAP outlook is provided.
We expect cash from operating activities to be in the range of approximately $800 million to $920 million. Transaction-related cash flows, if applicable, are included within Legacy and transformation, which is consistent with how we evaluate our business operations from a cash flow standpoint are complete. Transaction-related cash flows included within Legacy and transformation were completed during 2022. See below for further discussion on Legacy and transformation. Cash from operating activities also includes cash requirements related to our pension plans, environmental sites, restructuring and asset retirement obligations, taxes and interest on borrowings.
We do not expect to make any voluntary cash contributions to our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan in 2023. The plan is slightly overfunded and our portfolio is comprised of 100 percent fixed income securities and cash. Our investment strategy is a liability hedging approach with an objective of maintaining the funded status of the plan such that the funded status volatility is minimized and the likelihood that we will be required to make significant contributions to the plan is limited.
Projected 2023 spending, net of recoveries includes approximately $35 million to $45 million of net environmental remediation spending for our sites accounted for within continuing operations. Environmental obligations for continuing operations primarily represent obligations at shut down or abandoned facilities within businesses that do not meet the criteria for presentation as discontinued operations.Projected 2023 spending, net of recoveries includes approximately $35 million to $45 million of net environmental remediation spending for our discontinued sites. These projections include spending as a result of a settlement reached in 2019 at our Middleport, New York site of $10 million maximum per year, on average, until the remediation is complete.Total projected 2023 environmental spending, inclusive of sites accounted for within both continuing operations and discontinued sites, is expected to be in the range of approximately $70 million to $90 million.
We expect to make payments of approximately $15 million to $25 million in 2023, of which approximately $10 million is related to exit and disposal costs as a result of our previous decision in 2019 to exit sales of all carbofuran formulations (including Furadan® insecticide/nematicide, as well as Curaterr® insecticide/nematicide and any other brands used with carbofuran products).
Projected 2023 capital expenditures and expenditures related to contract manufacturers are expected to be in the range of approximately $140 million to $180 million. The spending is mainly driven by continuing to expand capacity to meet growing demand, especially for our new products. Expenditures related to contract manufacturers are included within "other investing activities".
Projected 2023 Legacy and transformation spending is expected to be in the range of approximately $60 million to $90 million. This is primarily driven by environmental remediation spending for our discontinued sites, discussed above, and other Legacy liabilities.
In February 2022, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $1 billion of the Company's common stock.  During the three months ended March 31, 2023, 193,815 shares were repurchased under the publicly announced repurchase program. At March 31, 2023, $875.0 million remained unused under our Board-authorized repurchase program. This repurchase program does not include a specific timetable or price targets and may be suspended or terminated at any time. Shares may be purchased through open market or privately negotiated transactions at the discretion of management based on its evaluation of market conditions and other factors. We also reacquire shares from time to time from employees in connections with vesting, exercise and forfeiture of awards under our equity compensation plans.We intend to repurchase, at a minimum, enough FMC shares to offset any dilution from share-based compensation.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, we paid dividends of $72.7 million and $66.8 million, respectively. On April 20, 2023, we paid dividends totaling $72.7 million to our shareholders of record as of March 31, 2023. We expect to continue to make quarterly dividend payments. Future cash dividends, as always, will depend on a variety of factors, including earnings, capital requirements, financial condition, general economic conditions and other factors considered relevant by us and is subject to final determination by our Board of Directors.
See Note 19 to the condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-Q.
Information related to our contractual commitments at December 31, 2022 can be found within Part II, Item 7 of our 2022 Form 10-K. There have been no significant changes to our contractual commitments during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
A detailed discussion related to climate change can be found in Part II, Item 7 of our 2022 Form 10-K.
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
See Note 18 to the condensed consolidated financial statements in this Form 10-Q for additional discussion surrounding our fair value measurements.
Our earnings, cash flows, and financial position are exposed to market risks relating to fluctuations in commodity prices, interest rates, and foreign currency exchange rates. Our policy is to minimize exposure to our cash flow over time caused by changes in commodity, interest, and currency exchange rates. To accomplish this, we have implemented a controlled program of risk management consisting of appropriate derivative contracts entered into with major financial institutions.The analysis below presents the sensitivity of the market value of our financial instruments to selected changes in market rates and prices. The range of changes chosen reflects our view of changes that are reasonably possible over a one-year period. Market-value estimates are based on the present value of projected future cash flows considering the market rates and prices chosen.At March 31, 2023, our financial instrument position was a net liability of $46.8 million compared to a net liability of $4.6 million at December 31, 2022. The change in the net financial instrument position was primarily due to changes in foreign exchange and interest rates.Since our risk management programs are generally highly effective, the potential loss in value for each risk management portfolio described below would be largely offset by changes in the value of the underlying exposure.
Energy costs are diversified among electricity and natural gas. We attempt to mitigate our exposure to increasing energy costs by hedging the cost of future deliveries of natural gas and electricity. To analyze the effect of changing energy prices, we perform a sensitivity analysis in which we assume an instantaneous 10 percent change in energy market prices from their levels at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, with all other variables (including interest rates) held constant. Note, as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we had no open commodity contracts. As a result, there was no sensitivity analysis performed over commodity price risk for the periods presented.
The primary currencies for which we have exchange rate exposure are the U.S. dollar versus the Euro, the Chinese yuan, the Brazilian real, Mexican peso, and the Argentine peso. Foreign currency debt and foreign exchange forward contracts are used in countries where we do business, thereby reducing our net asset exposure. Foreign exchange forward contracts are also used to hedge firm and highly anticipated foreign currency cash flows.To analyze the effects of changing foreign currency rates, we have performed a sensitivity analysis in which we assume an instantaneous 10 percent change in the foreign currency exchange rates from their levels at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, with all other variables (including interest rates) held constant.
One of the strategies that we can use to manage interest rate exposure is to enter into interest rate swap agreements. In these agreements, we agree to exchange, at specified intervals, the difference between fixed and variable interest amounts calculated on an agreed-upon notional principal amount. As of March 31, 2023, we had outstanding interest rate swap contracts in place with an aggregate notional value of $200.0 million.To analyze the effects of changing interest rates, we have performed a sensitivity analysis in which we assume an instantaneous one percent change in the interest rates from their levels at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, with all other variables held constant.
Our debt portfolio, at March 31, 2023, is composed of 48 percent fixed-rate debt and 52 percent variable-rate debt. The variable-rate component of our debt portfolio principally consists of borrowings under our 2021 Term Loan Facility, Credit Facility, commercial paper program, and amounts outstanding under foreign subsidiary credit lines. Changes in interest rates affect different portions of our variable-rate debt portfolio in different ways. Based on the variable-rate debt in our debt portfolio at March 31, 2023, a one percentage point increase in interest rates then in effect would have increased gross interest expense by $5.5 million and a one percentage point decrease in interest rates then in effect would have decreased gross interest expense by $5.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023.
The Company’s investor relations website, located at https://investors.fmc.com, should be considered as a recognized channel of distribution, and the Company may periodically post important information to the web site for investors, including information that the Company may wish to disclose publicly for purposes of complying with the federal securities laws and our disclosure obligations under the SEC's Regulation FD. We encourage investors and others interested in the Company to monitor our investor relations website for material disclosures. Our website address is included in this Form 10-Q as a textual reference only and the information on the website is not incorporated by reference into this Form 10-Q.