
General Dynamics is a global aerospace and defense company that offers a broad portfolio of products and services in business aviation; ship construction and repair; land combat vehicles, weapons systems and munitions; and technology products and services.Our company is organized into four operating segments: Aerospace, Marine Systems, Combat Systems and Technologies. We refer to the latter three collectively as our defense segments. Our primary customer is the U.S. government, including the Department of Defense (DoD), the intelligence community and other U.S. government customers. We also have significant business with non-U.S. governments and a diverse base of corporate and individual buyers of business jet aircraft and related services. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, and with the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-Q.
The disruptions caused by the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic and the ongoing conflict in Ukraine continue to impact global economies and businesses. The impact primarily affecting our business is supply chain challenges, including inflationary pressures. In our Aerospace segment, supply chain challenges have paced our ability to ramp up production in response to strong customer demand for our aircraft. Within our defense segments, the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in supply chain challenges, which we continue to experience, particularly in our Marine Systems (especially in the submarine supply chain) and Technologies segments. The Russia-Ukraine conflict has created additional demand for our products and services, particularly in our Combat Systems segment, though the timing and extent of incremental contract activity resulting from that demand remains uncertain.Any longer-term impact of these global events on our business is currently unknown due to the uncertainty around their duration and broader impact. The Review of Operating Segments includes information on these global events for the affected segments.
The following paragraphs explain how we recognize revenue and operating costs in our operating segments and the terminology we use to describe our operating results.In the Aerospace segment, we record revenue on contracts for new aircraft when the customer obtains control of the asset, which is generally upon delivery and acceptance by the customer of the fully outfitted aircraft. Revenue associated with the segment’s services businesses is recognized as work progresses or upon delivery of services. Fluctuations in revenue from period to period result from the number and mix of new aircraft deliveries, and the level and type of aircraft services performed during the period.The majority of the Aerospace segment’s operating costs relates to new aircraft production on firm orders and consists of labor, material, subcontractor and overhead costs. The costs are accumulated in production lots, recorded in inventory and recognized as operating costs at aircraft delivery based on the estimated average unit cost in a production lot. While changes in the estimated average unit cost for a production lot impact the level of operating costs, the amount of operating costs reported in a given period is based largely on the number and type of aircraft delivered. Operating costs in the Aerospace segment’s services businesses are recognized generally as incurred.For new aircraft, operating earnings and margin are a function of the prices of our aircraft, our operational efficiency in manufacturing and outfitting the aircraft, and the mix of ultra-large-cabin, large-cabin and mid-cabin aircraft deliveries. Aircraft mix can also refer to the stage of program maturity for our aircraft models. A new aircraft model typically has lower margins in its initial production lots, and then margins generally increase as we realize efficiencies in the production process. Additional factors affecting the segment’s earnings and margin include the volume, mix and profitability of services work performed, the market for pre-owned aircraft, and the level of general and administrative (G&A) and net research and development (R&D) costs incurred by the segment.In the defense segments, revenue on long-term government contracts is recognized generally over time as the work progresses, either as products are produced or as services are rendered. Typically, revenue is recognized over time using costs incurred to date relative to total estimated costs at completion to measure progress toward satisfying our performance obligations. Incurred costs represent work performed, which corresponds with, and thereby best depicts, the transfer of control to the customer. Contract costs include labor, material, overhead and, when appropriate, G&A expenses. Variances in costs recognized from period to period reflect primarily increases and decreases in production or activity levels on individual contracts. Because costs are used as a measure of progress, year-over-year variances in costs result in corresponding variances in revenue, which we generally refer to as volume.Operating earnings and margin in the defense segments are driven by changes in volume, performance or contract mix. Performance refers to changes in profitability based on adjustments to estimates at completion on individual contracts. These adjustments result from increases or decreases to the estimated value of the contract, the estimated costs to complete the contract or both. Therefore, changes in costs incurred in the period compared with prior periods do not necessarily impact profitability. It is only when total estimated costs at completion on a given contract change without a corresponding change in the contract value (or vice versa) that the profitability of that contract may be impacted. Contract mix refers to changes in the volume of higher- versus lower-margin work. Higher or lower margins can result from a number of factors, including contract type (e.g., fixed-price/cost-reimbursable) and type of work (e.g., development/production). Contract mix can also refer to the stage of program maturity for our long-term production contracts. New long-term production contracts typically have lower margins initially, and then margins generally increase as we achieve learning curve improvements or realize other cost reductions.
Our consolidated revenue increased in the first quarter of 2023 due to higher volume across our defense segments, primarily in U.S. Navy ship construction. Operating earnings increased in the three-month period, but were negatively impacted by program mix and supply chain-driven cost pressure that resulted in a 20 basis-point decrease in operating margin.
Following is a discussion of operating results for each of our operating segments. For the Aerospace segment, results are analyzed by specific types of products and services, consistent with how the segment is managed. For the defense segments, the discussion is based on markets and the lines of products and services offered with a supplemental discussion of specific contracts and programs when significant to the results. Additional information regarding our segments can be found in Note L to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1.
The change in the Aerospace segment’s revenue in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
Aircraft manufacturing revenue was down in the first quarter of 2023 due to fewer large-cabin aircraft deliveries. This decrease was offset largely by an increase in demand for aircraft services, particularly maintenance and fixed-based operator (FBO) services, as customer flight activity remained at elevated levels during the quarter.The change in the segment’s operating earnings in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
Aircraft manufacturing operating earnings were down in the first quarter of 2023 due primarily to the number and mix of deliveries and higher production costs resulting from supply chain challenges. This decrease was offset partially by higher operating earnings from aircraft services driven by volume, and by lower G&A/other expenses. In total, the Aerospace segment’s operating margin decreased 70 basis points in the first quarter of 2023 compared with the prior-year period.
The increase in the Marine Systems segment’s revenue in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
Revenue from U.S. Navy ship construction and engineering was up due primarily to increased volume on the Columbia-class submarine program. Overall, the Marine Systems segment’s operating margin decreased 90 basis points due to supply chain impacts to the Virginia-class submarine schedule.
The increase in the Combat Systems segment’s revenue in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
Revenue from U.S. military vehicles increased in the first quarter of 2023 due to higher volume on Mobile Protected Firepower (MPF) and Stryker vehicles, particularly the maneuver short-range air defense (M-SHORAD) variant. Weapons systems and munitions revenue was up due to increased artillery production. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar against the Canadian dollar, euro and British pound compared with the prior-year period has negatively impacted the Combat Systems segment’s results, specifically the translation of our international revenue from local currencies into U.S. dollars. Had foreign exchange rates in the first quarter of 2023 held constant from the same period in 2022, the Combat Systems segment’s revenue would have increased 7.1% in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the prior-year period.Overall, the Combat Systems segment’s operating margin increased 40 basis points in the first quarter of 2023.
The increase in the Technologies segment’s revenue in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
*Command, control, communications, computers, cyber, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissanceThe Technologies segment’s revenue was up due to increased demand across the business and the acquisition of a C5ISR solutions business in the third quarter of 2022. The Technologies segment’s operating margin decreased 20 basis points due to program mix.
Corporate operating costs totaled $46 in the first quarter of 2023 compared with $71 in the first quarter of 2022 and consisted primarily of equity-based compensation expense. The decrease was due primarily to timing of expense recognition.
The increase in product revenue in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
Ship construction revenue increased due to higher volume on the Columbia-class submarine program. Military vehicle production revenue was up due primarily to higher volume on the U.S. Army’s MPF and Stryker programs. These increases were offset partially by lower revenue from aircraft manufacturing due to fewer large-cabin aircraft deliveries. In the first quarter of 2023, product operating costs increased at a higher rate than revenue due primarily to supply chain impacts to the Virginia-class submarine schedule.
The increase in service revenue in the first quarter of 2023 consisted of the following:
Ship services revenue increased in the first quarter of 2023 due to a higher volume of engineering work on the Columbia-class submarine program. Aircraft services revenue increased due to additional maintenance work and FBO activity. The primary drivers of the increase in service operating costs were the changes in volume on the programs described above.
As a percentage of revenue, G&A expenses were 5.9% in the first three months of 2023 compared with 6.7% in the first three months of 2022, which included the accelerated recognition of equity-based compensation expense.
Net other income was $33 in the first three months of 2023 compared with $39 in the first three months of 2022 and represents primarily the non-service components of pension and other post-retirement benefits.
Net interest expense was $91 in the first three months of 2023 compared with $98 in the prior-year period, reflecting the repayment of debt in the fourth quarter of 2022. See Note H to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1, for additional information regarding our debt obligations, including interest rates.
Our effective tax rate was 17% in the first three months of 2023 compared with 14% in the prior-year period. The lower effective tax rate in the first quarter of 2022 reflected a variety of factors, including the impact of tax benefits from equity-based compensation.
Our total backlog, including funded and unfunded portions, was $89.8 billion at the end of the first quarter of 2023 compared with $91.1 billion on December 31, 2022. Our total backlog is equal to our remaining performance obligations under contracts with customers as discussed in Note B to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1. Our total estimated contract value, which combines total backlog with estimated potential contract value, was $128.4 billion on April 2, 2023.The following table details the backlog and estimated potential contract value of each segment at the end of the first quarter of 2023 and fourth quarter of 2022:
Aerospace funded backlog represents primarily new aircraft orders for which we have definitive purchase contracts and deposits from customers. Unfunded backlog consists of agreements to provide future aircraft maintenance and support services. The Aerospace segment ended the first quarter of 2023 with backlog of $19.3 billion.The Aerospace segment’s book-to-bill ratio (orders divided by revenue) was 0.9-to-1 in the first quarter of 2023. Aircraft orders were solid until two regional banks failed in March 2023. This created a pause in the market for about three weeks late in the quarter. Normal activity returned early in the second quarter.Beyond total backlog, estimated potential contract value represents primarily options and other agreements with existing customers to purchase new aircraft and long-term aircraft services agreements. On April 2, 2023, estimated potential contract value in the Aerospace segment was $804.
The total backlog in our defense segments represents the estimated remaining sales value of work to be performed under firm contracts. The funded portion of total backlog includes items that have been authorized and appropriated by the U.S. Congress and funded by customers, as well as commitments by international customers that are approved and funded similarly by their governments. The unfunded portion of total backlog includes the amounts we believe are likely to be funded, but there is no guarantee that future budgets and appropriations will provide the same funding level currently anticipated for a given program.Estimated potential contract value in our defense segments includes unexercised options associated with existing firm contracts and unfunded work on indefinite delivery, indefinite quantity (IDIQ) contracts. Contract options represent agreements to perform additional work under existing contracts at the election of the customer. We recognize options in backlog when the customer exercises the option and establishes a firm order. For IDIQ contracts, we evaluate the amount of funding we expect to receive and include this amount in our estimated potential contract value. This amount is often less than the total IDIQ contract value, particularly when the contract has multiple awardees. The actual amount of funding received in the future may be higher or lower than our estimate of potential contract value.Total backlog in our defense segments was $70.5 billion on April 2, 2023. In the first quarter of 2023, the Combat Systems and Technologies segments achieved book-to-bill ratios of 1.5-to-1 and 1-to-1, respectively. Estimated potential contract value in our defense segments was $37.7 billion on April 2, 2023, up 5% from $35.9 billion on December 31, 2022. We received the following significant contract awards during the first quarter of 2023:
•$215 from the U.S. Navy for maintenance and modernization work on the USS Anchorage and USS Arlington, San Antonio-class amphibious transport docks. •$45 from the Navy for maintenance and modernization work on the USS Sampson, an Arleigh Burke-class (DDG-51) guided-missile destroyer.•$25 from the Navy to provide Trident II Strategic Weapon System Trainer Facility kits and engineering support services.
•$285 from the U.S. Army to establish additional capacity for 155mm artillery projectile metal parts production. The contract has a maximum potential value of $1.3 billion.•$350 from the Army to upgrade Abrams main battle tanks to the system enhancement package version 3 (SEPv3) configuration and provide system and sustainment technical support services for the Abrams program. •$305 to produce light armored vehicles (LAVs) and provide the associated spares and logistics support services for Colombia.•$255 for various munitions and ordnance.•$210 from the Army to provide spare parts and inventory management and support services for the Stryker wheeled combat vehicle program.•$205 to produce Abrams main battle tanks in the SEPv3 configuration for Poland, bringing the total firm backlog for the program to $1.1 billion.•$65 to produce Stryker infantry carrier vehicles for North Macedonia. The contract has a maximum potential value of $145.
•An IDIQ contract to provide full spectrum security support services to protect mission critical infrastructure for the U.S. Air Force. The contract has a maximum potential value of $4.5 billion between two awardees.•$130 to provide flight simulation and training services for the Army. The contract has a maximum potential value of $1.7 billion.•An IDIQ contract to provide sustainment services, spare parts and obsolescence risk management services, and system readiness for the Army’s Prophet Enhanced sensor systems. The contract has a maximum potential value of $480.•$400 for several key classified contracts.•Two IDIQ contracts from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to provide technical, research and support services to enable the agency’s critical environmental and climate initiatives. These contracts have a maximum potential value of $380.•$135 from the Air Force for the Battlefield Information Collection and Exploitation System (BICES) program to provide intelligence information sharing capabilities.•$115 to provide global enterprise and digital modernization services under the Southern Command’s (SOUTHCOM) Cyber Information Technology Enterprise Services (SCITES) contract.•$105 to provide enterprise IT, communications and mission command support services to U.S. Army Europe.•$100 from the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services in support of its Medicaid management information system.•$80 from the Army for computing and communications equipment under the Common Hardware Systems-5 (CHS-5) program.
We place a strong emphasis on cash flow generation, which is underpinned by an operating discipline focused on cost control and working capital management. This emphasis gives us the flexibility for prudent capital deployment, while allowing us to step down debt over time, and preserves a strong balance sheet for future opportunities.We evaluate a variety of capital deployment options based on current market conditions and our long-term outlook, and we believe agility is a key component of our capital deployment strategy as market conditions change over time. Our capital deployment priorities include investments in our products and services to drive long-term growth, a predictable dividend, strategic acquisitions and opportunistic share repurchases.We believe cash generated by operating activities, supplemented by commercial paper issuances, is sufficient to satisfy our short- and long-term liquidity needs. An additional potential source of capital is the issuance of long-term debt in capital market transactions.We ended the first quarter of 2023 with a cash and equivalents balance of $2 billion compared with $1.2 billion at the end of 2022. The following is a discussion of our major operating, investing and financing activities in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, as classified on the unaudited Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows in Part I, Item 1:
Cash provided by operating activities was $1.5 billion in the first three months of 2023 compared with $2 billion in the same period in 2022. The primary driver of cash inflows in both periods was net earnings. Cash flows in both periods were affected positively by an increase in customer deposits driven by Gulfstream aircraft orders and a decrease in unbilled receivables due to the receipt of progress payments on large international vehicle contracts in our Combat Systems segment.
Cash used by investing activities was $190 in the first three months of 2023 compared with $147 in the same period in 2022. Our investing activities include cash paid for capital expenditures and business acquisitions; purchases, sales and maturities of marketable securities; and proceeds from asset sales. The primary use of cash for investing activities in both periods was capital expenditures. Capital expenditures were $161 in the first three months of 2023 compared with $141 in the same period in 2022.
Cash used by financing activities was $475 in the first three months of 2023 compared with $517 in the same period in 2022. Financing activities include the use of cash for repurchases of common stock, payment of dividends, and debt and commercial paper repayments. Our financing activities also include proceeds received from debt and commercial paper issuances and employee stock option exercises.On March 8, 2023, our board of directors (Board) declared an increased quarterly dividend of $1.32 per share, the 26th consecutive annual increase. Previously, the Board had increased the quarterly dividend to $1.26 per share in March 2022. Cash dividends paid were $345 in the first three months of 2023 compared with $330 in the same period in 2022.Our Board from time to time authorizes management to repurchase outstanding shares of our common stock on the open market. We paid $90 and $294 in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, respectively, to repurchase our outstanding shares. On April 2, 2023, 6.3 million shares remained authorized by our Board for repurchase, representing 2.3% of our total shares outstanding.Fixed-rate notes of $750 and $500 mature in May 2023 and August 2023, respectively. We currently plan to repay these notes at maturity using cash on hand, potentially supplemented by commercial paper or other borrowings. For additional information regarding our debt obligations, including scheduled debt maturities and interest rates, see Note H to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1.On April 2, 2023, we had no commercial paper outstanding, but we maintain the ability to access the commercial paper market in the future. Separately, we have a $4 billion committed bank credit facility for general corporate purposes and working capital needs and to support our commercial paper issuances. We also have an effective shelf registration on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that allows us to access the debt markets.
We emphasize the efficient conversion of net earnings into cash and the deployment of that cash to maximize shareholder returns. As described below, we use free cash flow to measure our performance in these areas. While we believe this metric provides useful information, it is not a defined operating measure under U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), and there are limitations associated with its use. Our calculation of this metric may not be completely comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in the method of calculation. As a result, the use of this metric should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, GAAP measures.We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities less capital expenditures. We believe free cash flow is a useful measure for investors because it portrays our ability to generate cash from our businesses for purposes such as repaying debt, funding business acquisitions, repurchasing our common stock and paying dividends. We use free cash flow to assess the quality of our earnings and as a key performance measure in evaluating management. The following table reconciles free cash flow with net cash provided by operating activities, as classified on the unaudited Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows in Part I, Item 1:
For a discussion of environmental matters and other contingencies, see Note J to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1. Except as otherwise noted in Note J, we do not expect our aggregate liability with respect to these matters to have a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based on the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires that we make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We employ judgment in making our estimates, but they are based on historical experience, currently available information and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. We believe our judgment is applied consistently and produces financial information that fairly depicts our results of operations for all periods presented.Accounting for long-term contracts and programs involves the use of various techniques to estimate total contract revenue and costs. Contract estimates are based on various assumptions to project the outcome of future events that often span several years. We review and update our contract-related estimates regularly. We recognize adjustments in estimated profit on contracts under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustment on profit recorded to date on a contract is recognized in the period the adjustment is identified. The aggregate impact of adjustments in contract estimates increased our operating earnings (and diluted earnings per share) by $77 ($0.22) and $105 ($0.30) for the three-month periods ended April 2, 2023, and April 3, 2022, respectively. While no adjustment on any one contract was material to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements for the three-month periods ended April 2, 2023, or April 3, 2022, our Marine Systems segment’s first-quarter 2023 results were affected negatively by supply chain impacts to the Virginia-class submarine schedule.Other critical accounting policies and estimates include long-lived assets and goodwill, commitments and contingencies, and retirement plans. For a full discussion of our critical accounting policies and estimates, see our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
The outstanding notes described in Note H to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1, issued by General Dynamics Corporation (the parent), are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on an unsecured, joint and several basis by several of the parent’s 100%-owned subsidiaries (the guarantors). The guarantee of each guarantor ranks equally in right of payment with all other existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness of such guarantor. A listing of the guarantors is included in an exhibit to this Form 10-Q.Because the parent is a holding company, its cash flow and ability to service its debt, including the outstanding notes, depends on the performance of its subsidiaries and the ability of those subsidiaries to distribute cash to the parent, whether by dividends, loans or otherwise. Holders of the outstanding notes have a direct claim only against the parent and the guarantors.Under the relevant indenture, the guarantee of each guarantor is limited to the maximum amount that can be guaranteed without rendering the guarantee voidable under applicable laws relating to fraudulent conveyance or fraudulent transfer or similar laws affecting the rights of creditors generally. Each indenture also provides that, in the event (1) of a merger, consolidation or sale or disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of a guarantor (other than a transaction with the parent or any of its subsidiaries) or (2) there occurs a transfer, sale or other disposition of the voting stock of a guarantor so that the guarantor is no longer a subsidiary of the parent, then the guarantor or the entity acquiring the assets (in the event of a sale or other disposition of all or substantially all of the assets of a guarantor) will be released and relieved of any obligations under the guarantee.The following summarized financial information presents the parent and guarantors (collectively, the combined obligor group) on a combined basis. The summarized financial information of the combined obligor group excludes net investment in and earnings of subsidiaries related to interests held by the combined obligor group in subsidiaries that are not guarantors of the notes.
The summarized balance sheet information presented above includes the funded status of the company’s primary qualified U.S. government pension plans as the parent has the ultimate obligation for the plans.