
The discussion set forth below, as well as other portions of this Quarterly Report, contain statements concerning potential future events. Such forward-looking statements are based upon assumptions by management, as of the date of this Quarterly Report, including assumptions about risks and uncertainties faced by the Company. Readers can identify these forward-looking statements by their use of such verbs as expects, anticipates, believes or similar verbs or conjugations of such verbs. If any of the Company’s assumptions prove incorrect or should unanticipated circumstances arise, actual results could materially differ from those anticipated by such forward-looking statements. The differences could be caused by a number of factors or combination of factors including, but not limited to, those factors identified in Part II, Item 1A of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q and in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. This report has been filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC” or the “Commission”) in Washington, D.C. and can be obtained by contacting the SEC’s public reference operations or obtaining it through the SEC’s website at http://www.sec.gov. Readers are strongly encouraged to consider those factors when evaluating any forward-looking statement concerning the Company. The Company will not update any forward-looking statements in this Quarterly Report to reflect future events or developments.The information contained in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Form 10-Q and the audited financial statements and notes thereto in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this document to "we", "us", "our" and similar terms refer to Garmin Ltd. and its subsidiaries.Unless otherwise indicated, amounts set forth in the discussion below are in thousands.
The Company is a leading worldwide provider of wireless devices, many of which feature Global Positioning System (GPS) navigation, and applications that are designed for people who live an active lifestyle. We are organized in the five operating segments of fitness, outdoor, aviation, marine, and auto OEM. Our products are sold through a variety of indirect distribution channels, including a large worldwide network of independent retailers, dealers, distributors, installation and repair shops, as well as original equipment manufacturers (OEMs). We also sell our products and services directly through our online webshop (garmin.com), subscriptions for connected services, and our own retail stores.
A number of headwinds including high inflation, rising interest rates, and a stronger U.S. Dollar relative to other major currencies have affected the economic environment and consumer behaviors. Additionally, while our global supply chain is routinely subject to component shortages, increased lead times, cost fluctuations, and logistics constraints, these factors have been further amplified by the current environment. We expect certain of these challenges to persist through 2023.The nature and degree of effects of the current business environment over time remain uncertain. Refer to Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Quarterly Report for further discussion of the risks and uncertainties facing our Company.
As indicated in Note 1 to the condensed consolidated financial statements, the Company announced an organization realignment in January 2023, which combined the consumer auto operating segment with the outdoor operating segment. As a result, the Company’s operating segments, which also represent our reportable segments, are fitness, outdoor, aviation, marine, and auto OEM. Results for the 13-week period ended March 26, 2022 have been recast below to conform with the current period presentation. This change had no effect on the Company’s consolidated results of operations.
Net sales decreased 2% for the 13-week period ended April 1, 2023 when compared to the year-ago quarter. Total unit sales in the first quarter of 2023 decreased to 3,210 when compared to total unit sales of 3,438 in the first quarter of 2022, which differs from the percent decrease in revenue primarily due to shifts in segment and product mix. Outdoor was the largest portion of our revenue mix at 29% in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 39% in the first quarter of 2022.The increase in fitness revenue was primarily driven by strong demand for our advanced wearables. Aviation revenue increased due to growth in both OEM and aftermarket product categories. The increase in marine revenue was primarily due to the timing of promotions. Auto OEM revenue increased primarily due to increased shipments of domain controllers. Outdoor revenue decreased primarily due to declines in our adventure watches.
Gross profit dollars in the first quarter of 2023 decreased 1%, primarily due to the decrease in net sales when compared to the year-ago quarter, as described above. Consolidated gross margin was slightly higher when compared to the year-ago quarter primarily due to lower freight costs.The fitness and marine gross margin increases of 130 and 300 basis points respectively, were primarily attributable to favorable freight costs. The outdoor and aviation gross margins were relatively flat when compared to the year-ago quarter. The auto OEM gross margin decrease of 160 basis points was primarily attributable to unfavorable product mix.
Total operating expense increased 270 basis points and 5% in absolute dollars when compared to the year-ago quarter.Advertising expense as a percent of revenue was relatively flat and decreased 11% in absolute dollars when compared to the year-ago quarter. The absolute dollar decrease was primarily attributable to decreased cooperative spend.Selling, general and administrative expense increased 150 basis points as a percent of revenue and 7% in absolute dollars compared to the year-ago quarter. The absolute dollar expense increase in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily attributable to increased personnel related expenses and information technology costs.Research and development expense increased 150 basis points as a percent of revenue and 6% in absolute dollars when compared to the year-ago quarter. The absolute dollar expense increase was primarily due to higher engineering personnel costs.
Total operating income decreased 14% in absolute dollars and 230 basis points as a percent of revenue when compared to the year-ago quarter. The decrease as a percent of revenue was primarily due to higher operating expenses, while net sales declined, as described above. The decrease in outdoor operating income was partially offset by improved performance in fitness, aviation, marine, and auto OEM. Auto OEM experienced an operating loss in the current quarter driven by ongoing investments in auto OEM programs, and we expect the segment to continue to experience operating losses through 2023.
The average interest return on cash and investments during the first quarter of 2023 was 2.4%, compared to 1.0% during the same quarter of 2022. Foreign currency gains and losses for the Company are driven by movements of a number of currencies in relation to the U.S. Dollar. The Taiwan Dollar is the functional currency of Garmin Corporation, the Euro is the functional currency of several subsidiaries, and the U.S. Dollar is the functional currency of Garmin (Europe) Ltd., although some transactions and balances are denominated in British Pounds. Other notable currency exposures include the Australian Dollar, Chinese Yuan, Japanese Yen, and Polish Zloty. The majority of the Company’s consolidated foreign currency gain or loss is typically driven by the significant cash and marketable securities, receivables and payables held in a currency other than the functional currency at a given legal entity. The $7.7 million currency gain recognized in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to the U.S. Dollar weakening against the Polish Zloty, British Pound Sterling, Chinese Yuan, and Euro, partially offset by the U.S. Dollar weakening against the Taiwan Dollar, within the 13-week period ended April 1, 2023. During this period, the U.S. Dollar weakened 2.7% against the Polish Zloty, 2.0% against the British Pound Sterling, 1.3% against the Chinese Yuan, and 1.3% against the Euro, resulting in gains of $4.5 million, $1.3 million, $0.7 million, and $0.5 million respectively, while the U.S. Dollar weakened 0.4% against the Taiwan Dollar, resulting in a loss of $1.1 million. The remaining net currency gain of $1.8 million was related to the impacts of other currencies, each of which was individually immaterial.The $3.5 million currency loss recognized in the first quarter of 2022 was primarily due to the U.S. Dollar strengthening against the Polish Zloty, Euro, and Japanese Yen, partially offset by the U.S. Dollar strengthening against the Taiwan Dollar, within the 13-week period ended March 26, 2022. During this period, the U.S. Dollar strengthened 5.7% against the Polish Zloty, 3.0% against the Euro, and 6.2% against the Japanese Yen, resulting in losses of $6.0 million, $5.1 million, and $1.6 million, respectively, while the U.S. Dollar strengthened 3.5% against the Taiwan Dollar, resulting in a gain of $8.2 million. The remaining net currency gain of $1.0 million was related to the impacts of other currencies, each of which was individually immaterial.
The Company recorded income tax expense of $19.4 million in the 13-week period ended April 1, 2023, compared to income tax expense of $24.3 million in the 13-week period ended March 26, 2022. The effective tax rate was 8.8% in the first quarter of 2023, compared to 10.3% in the first quarter of 2022. The decrease was primarily due to income mix by jurisdiction.
As a result of the above, net income for the 13-week period ended April 1, 2023 was $202.3 million compared to $211.6 million for the 13-week period ended March 26, 2022, a decrease of $9.3 million.
We primarily use cash flow from operations, and expect that future cash requirements may be used, to fund our capital expenditures, support our working capital requirements, pay dividends, fund share repurchases, and fund strategic acquisitions. We believe that our existing cash balances and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our short- and long-term projected working capital needs, capital expenditures, and other cash requirements.
As of April 1, 2023, we had approximately $2.7 billion of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Management invests idle or surplus cash in accordance with the investment policy, which has been approved by the Company’s Board of Directors. The investment policy’s primary objectives are to preserve capital, maintain an acceptable degree of liquidity, and maximize yield within the constraint of low credit risk. Garmin’s average interest returns on cash and investments during the first quarters of 2023 and 2022 were 2.4% and 1.0%, respectively. The fair value of our securities varies from period to period due to changes in interest rates, in the performance of the underlying collateral, and in the credit performance of the underlying issuer, among other factors. See Note 4 for additional information regarding marketable securities.
Cash provided by operating activities totaled $279.2 million for the first quarter of 2023, compared to $185.6 million for the first quarter of 2022. The increase was primarily due to a lower use of cash on purchases of inventory compared to the year-ago quarter, partially offset by a decrease in collections of accounts receivable in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022.Cash used in investing activities totaled $7.9 million for the first quarter of 2023, compared to $135.9 million for the first quarter of 2022. The decrease was primarily due to net redemptions of marketable securities in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the net purchases of marketable securities in the first quarter of 2022, as well as a decrease in purchases of property and equipment.Cash used in financing activities totaled $192.3 million for the first quarter of 2023, compared to $123.3 million for the first quarter of 2022. This increase was primarily due to the purchase of treasury stock under the share repurchase plan, and higher cash dividend payments in the first quarter of 2023, as our declared dividend increased from $0.67 per share for the four calendar quarters beginning in June 2021 to $0.73 per share for the four calendar quarters beginning in June 2022.
The Company has lease arrangements for certain real estate properties, vehicles, and equipment. Leased properties are typically used for office space, distribution, and retail. As of April 1, 2023, the Company had fixed lease payment obligations of $158.8 million, with $31.3 million payable within 12 months.
The Company obtains various raw materials and components for its products from a variety of third party suppliers. The Company’s inventory purchase obligations are primarily noncancelable. As of April 1, 2023, the Company had inventory purchase obligations of $714.7 million, with $494.5 million payable within 12 months.
The Company’s other purchase obligations primarily consist of noncancelable commitments for capital expenditures and other indirect purchases in connection with conducting our business. As of April 1, 2023, the Company had other purchase obligations of $415.4 million, with $188.2 million payable within 12 months.
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The presentation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to customer sales programs and incentives, product returns, bad debts, inventories, investments, intangible assets, income taxes, warranty obligations, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.For a description of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements, refer to Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 and “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022. There were no significant changes to the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates in the 13-week period ended April 1, 2023.