
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to help the reader understand the results of operations and financial condition of W.W. Grainger, Inc. (Grainger or Company) as it is viewed by management of the Company. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes for the year ended December 31, 2022 included in the Company's 2022 Form 10-K and the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included in Part I, Item 1: Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q.
Grainger is a broad line, business-to-business distributor of maintenance, repair and operating (MRO) products and services with operations primarily in North America, Japan and the U.K. Grainger uses a combination of its high-touch solutions and endless assortment businesses to serve its customers worldwide, which rely on Grainger for products and services that enable them to run safe, sustainable and productive operations.
For a discussion of the Company’s strategic priorities for 2023, see Part 1, Item 1: Business and Part II, Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s 2022 Form 10-K.
In combination with the economic recovery from the pandemic and repercussions from geopolitical events, including the war in Ukraine, the global economy continues to experience volatile disruptions including to the commodity, labor and transportation markets. These disruptions have contributed to an inflationary environment which has affected, and may continue to affect, the price and availability of certain products and services necessary for the Company's operations. Such disruptions have impacted, and may continue to impact, the Company's business, financial condition and results of operations.The Company continues to monitor economic conditions in the U.S. and globally, and the impact of macroeconomic pressures, including repercussions from the recent banking crisis, rising interest rates, fluctuating currency exchange rates, inflation and recession fears, on the Company’s business, customers, suppliers and other third parties. As a result of continued inflation, the Company has implemented strategies designed to mitigate certain adverse effects of higher costs while also remaining market price competitive. Historically, the Company’s broad and diverse customer base and the nondiscretionary nature of the Company’s products to its customers has helped it perform well in the industrial MRO market in recessionary periods. The full extent and impact of these conditions are uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.For further discussion of the Company's risks and uncertainties, see Part I, Item 1A: Risk Factors in the Company’s 2022 Form 10-K.
The following table is included as an aid to understanding the changes in Grainger’s Condensed Consolidated Statements of Earnings (in millions of dollars except per share amounts):
The following table is included as an aid to understanding the changes in Grainger's total net sales and daily sales from the prior period to the most recent period (in millions of dollars):
Net sales of $4,091 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $444 million, or 12%, compared to the same period in 2022. For further discussion on the Company's net sales, see the Segment Analysis section below. Gross profit of $1,634 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $251 million, or 18%, compared to the same period in 2022. Gross profit margin of 39.9% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased 200 basis points compared to the same period in 2022. For further discussion on the Company's gross profit, see the Segment Analysis section below.
SG&A of $954 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $105 million, or 12%, compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher payroll and marketing expenses.Operating earnings of $680 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $146 million, or 27%, compared to the same period in 2022. Income taxes of $154 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $22 million, or 17%, compared to the same period in 2022. The increase in tax expense was primarily driven by higher taxable operating earnings for the first quarter of 2023. Grainger's effective tax rates were 23.3% and 25.5% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily due to increased stock compensation tax benefit.Net earnings of $488 million attributable to W.W. Grainger, Inc. for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $122 million, or 33%, compared to the same period in 2022.Diluted earnings per share was $9.61 for the three months ended March 31, 2023, an increase of 36% compared to $7.07 for the same period in 2022.
The following table shows reported segment results (in millions of dollars):
Net sales of $3,294 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $416 million, or 15%, compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was due to price, which includes customer mix of 8% and volume, which includes product mix of 7%. Gross profit of $1,397 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $233 million, or 20%, compared to the same period in 2022. Gross profit margin of 42.4% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased 195 basis points compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was driven by improved product mix and freight efficiencies.SG&A of $775 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $92 million, or 14%, compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher payroll and marketing expenses. SG&A leverage improved by 20 basis points for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022.Operating earnings of $621 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $140 million, or 29%, compared to the same period in 2022.
The following table shows reported segment results (in millions of dollars):
Net sales of $724 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $27 million, or 4%, compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was due to sales growth of 14%, driven by new and repeat customers at Zoro, as well as new customer acquisition, repeat business and enterprise growth at MonotaRO, partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange of 10% due to changes in the exchange rate between the U.S. dollar and the Japanese yen. Gross profit of $214 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $17 million, or 9%, compared to the same period in 2022. Gross profit margin of 29.6% increased 140 basis points compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was driven by freight efficiencies and business unit mix.SG&A of $156 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $14 million, or 10%, compared to the same period in 2022. The increase was primarily driven by higher payroll and benefits and marketing expenses. SG&A leverage decreased by 125 basis points as higher expenses outpaced revenue growth for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022.Operating earnings of $58 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $3 million, or 6%, compared to the same period in 2022.
Grainger believes its current balances of cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and availability under its revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet its liquidity needs for the next twelve months. The Company expects to continue to invest in its business and return excess cash to shareholders through cash dividends and share repurchases, which it plans to fund through cash flows generated from operations. Grainger also maintains access to capital markets and may issue debt or equity securities from time to time, which may provide an additional source of liquidity.
As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, Grainger had cash and cash equivalents of $461 million and $325 million, respectively. The Company had approximately $1.7 billion in available liquidity as of March 31, 2023.
The following table shows the Company's cash flow activity for the periods presented (in millions of dollars):
Net cash provided by operating activities was $454 million and $343 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase was primarily due to higher net earnings, partially offset by changes in year-over-year working capital requirements primarily due to sales growth and inflation.Net cash used in investing activities was $96 million and $57 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The change was driven by increased U.S. supply chain investment compared to the prior year period in 2022.Net cash used in financing activities was $224 million and $159 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase was due to higher treasury stock repurchases compared to the prior year period.
Working capital as of March 31, 2023 was $3,032 million, an increase of $168 million when compared to $2,864 million as of December 31, 2022. The increase was primarily driven by increased accounts receivable due to continued sales growth and lower accrued current liabilities. As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 2.7 and 2.5, respectively.
Grainger maintains a debt ratio and liquidity position that provides flexibility in funding working capital needs and long-term cash requirements. In addition to internally generated funds, Grainger has various sources of financing available, including bank borrowings under lines of credit. Total debt, which is defined as total interest-bearing debt and lease liabilities as a percent of total capitalization, was 47.4% and 49.9% as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.
Grainger receives ratings from two independent credit rating agencies: Moody's Investor Service (Moody's) and Standard & Poor's (S&P). Both credit rating agencies currently rate the Company's corporate credit at investment grade. The following table summarizes the Company's credit ratings as of March 31, 2023:
There were no material changes to the Company’s commitments and other contractual obligations from those disclosed in Part II, Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s 2022 Form 10-K.
The preparation of Grainger’s Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes are in conformity with GAAP and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results of operations require the Company’s management to make assumptions and estimates that affect the reported amounts. The Company considers an accounting policy to be a critical estimate if: (i) it involves assumptions that are uncertain when judgment was applied, and (ii) changes in the estimate assumptions, or selection of a different estimate methodology, could have a significant impact on Grainger’s consolidated financial position and results. While the Company believes the assumptions and estimates used are reasonable, the Company’s management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances.
There were no material changes to the Company's critical accounting estimates from those disclosed in Part II, Item 7: Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company's 2022 Form 10-K.
From time to time in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q as well as in other written reports, communications and verbal statements, Grainger makes forward-looking statements that are not historical in nature but concern forecasts of future results, business plans, analyses, prospects, strategies, objectives and other matters that may be deemed to be “forward-looking statements” under the federal securities laws. Forward-looking statements can generally be identified by their use of terms such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “expect,” “could,” “forecast,” “may,” “intend,” “plan,” “predict,” “project,” “will” or “would” and similar terms and phrases, including references to assumptions.The Company cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized and achievement of future results is subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond the Company’s control, which could cause the Company’s results to differ materially from those that are presented.Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those presented or implied in the forward-looking statements include, without limitation: inflation, higher product costs or other expenses, including operational and administrative expenses; the impact of macroeconomic pressures and geopolitical trends, changes and events, including the impact of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on the global economy, tensions across the Taiwan Straits and in overall relations with China, and the ramifications of these and other events; a major loss of customers; loss or disruption of sources of supply; changes in customer or product mix; increased competitive pricing pressures; changes in third party practices regarding digital advertising; failure to enter into or sustain contractual arrangements on a satisfactory basis with group purchasing organizations; failure to develop, manage or implement new technology initiatives or business strategies, including with respect to the Company’s eCommerce platforms; failure to adequately protect intellectual property or successfully defend against infringement claims; fluctuations or declines in the Company's gross profit margin; the Company’s responses to market pressures; the outcome of pending and future litigation or governmental or regulatory proceedings, including with respect to wage and hour, anti-bribery and corruption, environmental, regulations related to advertising, marketing and the Internet, consumer protection, pricing (including disaster or emergency declaration pricing statutes), product liability, compliance or safety, trade and export compliance, general commercial disputes, or privacy and cybersecurity matters; investigations, inquiries, audits and changes in laws and regulations; failure to comply with laws, regulations and standards, including new or stricter environmental laws or regulations; government contract matters; disruption or breaches of information technology or data security systems involving the Company or third parties on which the Company depends; general industry, economic, market or political conditions; general global economic conditions including tariffs and trade issues and policies; currency exchange rate fluctuations; market volatility, including price and trading volume volatility or price declines of the Company’s common stock; commodity price volatility; facilities disruptions or shutdowns; higher fuel costs or disruptions in transportation services; outbreaks of pandemic disease or viral contagions such as the COVID-19 pandemic; natural or human induced disasters, extreme weather and other catastrophes or conditions; effects of climate change; failure to execute on our efforts and programs related to environmental, social and governance matters; competition for, or failure to attract, retain, train, motivate and develop executives and key employees; loss of key members of management or key employees; changes in effective tax rates; changes in credit ratings or outlook; the Company’s incurrence of indebtedness or failure to comply with restrictions and obligations under its debt agreements and instruments; and other factors identified under Part I, Item 1A: Risk Factors in the Company's latest Form 10-K, as updated from time to time in the Company's Quarterly Form 10-Q.The preceding list is not intended to be an exhaustive list of all of the factors that could impact the Company's forward-looking statements. Given these risks and uncertainties, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on the Company’s forward-looking statements and the Company undertakes no obligation to update or revise any of its forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.