
Huntington Ingalls Industries, Inc. ("HII", "we", "us", or "our") is a global, all-domain defense partner, building and delivering the world’s most powerful, survivable naval ships and technologies that safeguard America’s seas, sky, land, space, and cyber. For more than a century, our Ingalls Shipbuilding segment ("Ingalls") in Mississippi and Newport News Shipbuilding segment ("Newport News") in Virginia have built more ships in more ship classes than any other U.S. naval shipbuilder, making us America's largest shipbuilder. Our Mission Technologies segment delivers high-value engineering and technology solutions to enable multi-domain distributed operations in the government and commercial markets. Headquartered in Newport News, Virginia, HII employs approximately 43,000 people domestically and internationally.We conduct most of our business with the U.S. Government, primarily the Department of Defense ("DoD"). As prime contractor, principal subcontractor, team member, or partner, we participate in many high-priority U.S. defense programs. Ingalls includes our non-nuclear ship design, construction, repair, and maintenance businesses. Newport News includes all of our nuclear ship design, construction, overhaul, refueling, and repair and maintenance businesses. Our Mission Technologies segment provides a wide range of services and products, including command, control, computers, communications, cyber, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance ("C5ISR") systems and operations; the application of Artificial Intelligence and machine learning to battlefield decisions; defense and offensive cyberspace strategies and electronic warfare; unmanned autonomous systems; live, virtual, and constructive training solutions; platform modernization; and critical nuclear operations.The following discussion should be read along with the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements included in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, as well as our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We continue to see uncertainty in the economy, our industry, and our company, with challenges for customers and suppliers, labor shortages, supply chain challenges, and inflation, among other impacts.U.S. Government Contracts - The President submitted the fiscal year 2024 budget request on March 9, 2023, and the request is now under consideration by Congress. The budget request reflects continued investment in shipbuilding, funding the second Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarine, two Virginia class (SSN 774) attack submarines, two Flight III Arleigh Burke class (DDG 51) destroyers, and the final increment of Fallujah (LHA 9). Additionally, the budget request continues funding for USS Gerald R. Ford class (CVN 78) nuclear aircraft carriers and aircraft carrier refueling programs, and includes investment in the submarine industrial base. The U.S. Marine Corps included a LPD Flight II amphibious ship (LPD 33) in its fiscal year 2024 unfunded priority list, which was submitted to the Congress shortly after the release of the budget request.Political and Economic Environment - The global geopolitical and economic environment continues to be impactedby uncertainty, heightened tensions, and instability. Geopolitical relationships have changed, and are continuing tochange, and the U.S. and its allies face a global security environment that includes threats from state and non-stateactors, including major global powers, as well as terrorist organizations, emerging nuclear tensions, diverse regionalsecurity concerns, and political instability. These global threats persist across all domains, from undersea to spaceto cyber, and the global market for defense products, services, and solutions is driven by these complex andevolving security challenges. Our current operating environment exists in the broader context of political andsocioeconomic priorities and reflects, among other things, the continued impact of and uncertainty surroundinggeopolitical tensions, financial market volatility, inflation, a challenging labor market, and continued public health issues. For further information on our business environment, see the discussion under Business Environment under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As discussed in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K, we consider our policies relating to the following matters to be critical accounting policies and estimates:•Revenue recognition;•Purchase accounting, goodwill, and intangible assets;•Litigation, commitments, and contingencies;•Retirement related benefit plans; and•Workers' compensation.As of March 31, 2023, there had been no material changes to the foregoing critical accounting policies, estimates, and judgments since December 31, 2022.
For convenience, a brief description of certain programs discussed in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q is included in the "Glossary of Programs" in this section.
We manage and assess the performance of our business based on our performance on individual contracts and programs using the financial measures referred to below, with consideration given to the Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates, and Judgments referred to in this section. Our portfolio of long-term contracts is largely flexibly-priced. Therefore, sales tend to fluctuate in concert with costs across our large portfolio of active contracts, with operating income being a critical measure of operating performance. Under FAR rules that govern our business with the U.S. Government, most types of costs are allowable, and we do not focus on individual cost groupings, such as cost of sales or general and administrative expenses, as much as we do on total contract costs, which are a key factor in determining contract operating income. As a result, in evaluating our operating performance, we look primarily at changes in sales and service revenues, as well as operating income, including the effects of significant changes in operating income as a result of changes in contract financial estimates and the use of the cumulative catch-up method of accounting in accordance with GAAP. This approach is consistent with the long-term life cycle of our contracts, as management assesses the bidding of each contract by focusing on net sales and operating profit and monitors performance in a similar manner through contract completion. Consequently, our discussion of business segment performance focuses on net sales and operating profit, consistent with our approach for managing our business.
The following table presents selected financial highlights:
Period-to-period revenues reflect performance under new and ongoing contracts. Changes in sales and servicerevenues are typically expressed in terms of volume. Unless otherwise described, volume generally refers toincreases (or decreases) in reported revenues due to varying production activity levels, delivery rates, or servicelevels on individual contracts. Volume changes will typically carry a corresponding income change based on theprofit margin rate for a particular contract.Sales and service revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $98 million, or 4%, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to higher volumes at Newport News and Mission Technologies, partially offset by lower volumes at Ingalls.
Cost of sales for both product sales and service revenues consists of materials, labor, and subcontracting costs, as well as an allocation of indirect costs for overhead. We manage the type and amount of costs at the contract level, which is the basis for estimating our total costs at completion of our contracts. Unusual fluctuations in operating performance driven by changes in a specific cost element across multiple contracts are described in our analysis.Refer to "Segment Operating Results" and "Product and Service Analysis" in this section for details related to cost of sales for both product sales and service revenues.
The activities of our operating investments are closely aligned with the operations of the segments holding the investments. We therefore record income related to earnings from equity method investments in our operating income.Refer to "Segment Operating Results" in this section for details related to income from operating investments.
In accordance with industry practice and the regulations that govern the cost accounting requirements for government contracts, most general and administrative expenses are considered allowable and allocable costs on government contracts. These costs are allocated to contracts in progress on a systematic basis, and contract performance factors include this cost component as an element of cost.General and administrative expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $3 million from the same period in 2022, primarily due to higher state income taxes and overhead costs.
We consider operating income an important measure for evaluating our operating performance, and, consistent with industry practice, we define operating income as revenues less the related costs of producing the revenues and general and administrative expenses.We internally manage our operations by reference to "segment operating income," which is defined as operating income before the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment and non-current state income taxes, neither of which affects segment performance. Segment operating income is not a recognized measure under GAAP.  When analyzing our operating performance, investors should use segment operating income in addition to, and not as an alternative for, operating income or any other performance measure presented in accordance with GAAP. It is a measure we use to evaluate our core operating performance.  We believe segment operating income reflects an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. We believe the measure is used by investors and is a useful indicator to measure our performance. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of segment operating income may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Refer to"Segment Operating Results" in this section for details related to segment operating income, as well as activity within each segment.The following table reconciles operating income to segment operating income:
Operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $3 million compared with the same period in 2022, primarily due to favorable changes in the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment and non-current state income taxes, partially offset by lower segment operating income.
The FAS/CAS Adjustment reflects the difference between expenses for pension and other postretirement benefits determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP Financial Accounting Standards ("FAS") and the expenses for these items included in segment operating income in accordance with U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards ("CAS"). The Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment excludes the following components of net periodic benefit costs: interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of prior service cost (credit) and actuarial loss (gain), and settlement and curtailment effects.
The components of the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment were as follows:
The Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment was a net expense of $19 million and $37 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The favorable change was primarily driven by the more immediate recognition of higher interest rates under FAS.
Non-current state income taxes include deferred state income taxes, which reflect the change in deferred state tax assets and liabilities, and the tax expense or benefit associated with changes in state unrecognized tax benefits in the relevant period. These amounts are recorded within operating income. Current period state income tax expense is charged to contract costs and included in cost of sales and service revenues in segment operating income.Non-current state income tax benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $4 million, compared to non-current state income tax expense of $1 million for the same period in 2022. The favorable change in non-current state income taxes was driven by a decrease in deferred state income tax expense, primarily attributable to the timing of long-term contract income for tax purposes.
Our discussion of business segment performance focuses on sales and service revenues and operating income,consistent with our approach for managing our business. We are aligned into three reportable segments: Ingalls, Newport News, and Mission Technologies.
The following table presents segment sales and segment operating results:
Segment operating income reflects the aggregate performance results of contracts within a segment. Excluded from this measure are certain costs not directly associated with contract performance, such as the Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment and non-current state income taxes. Changes in segment operating income are typically expressed in terms of volume, as discussed above, or performance. Performance refers to changes in contract profit margin rates. These changes typically relate to profit recognition associated with revisions to estimated costs at completion ("EAC") that reflect improved or deteriorated operating performance on that contract. Operating income changes are accounted for on a cumulative to date basis at the time an EAC change is recorded. Segment operating income may also be affected by, among other things, contract performance, the effects of workforce stoppages, the effects of natural disasters such as hurricanes, resolution of disputed items with the customer, recovery of insurance proceeds, and other discrete events. At the completion of a long-term contract, any originally estimated costs not incurred or reserves not fully utilized, such as warranty reserves, could also impact contract earnings. Where such items have occurred and the effects are material, a separate description is provided.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, favorable and unfavorable cumulative catch-up revenue adjustments were as follows:
For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, net cumulative catch-up revenue adjustments by segment were as follows:
Ingalls revenues, including intersegment sales, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, decreased $54 million, or 9%, from the same period in 2022, primarily driven by lower revenues in amphibious assault ships and the Legend class National Security Cutter ("NSC") program, partially offset by higher revenues in surface combatants. Revenues on amphibious assault ships decreased due to lower volumes on USS Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28) following its delivery, Bougainville (LHA 8), L-Class planning yard services contract, and Richard M. McCool Jr. (LPD 29), partially offset by higher volumes on Fallujah (LHA 9) and LPD 32 (unnamed). Revenues on the Legend class NSC program decreased due to lower volumes on Friedman (NSC 11). Revenues on surface combatants increased due to higher volumes on George M. Neal (DDG 131), Jeremiah Denton (DDG 129), John F. Lehman (DDG 137), and Ted Stevens (DDG 128), partially offset by lower volumes on Lenah Sutcliffe Higbee (DDG 123) and USS Jack H. Lucas (DDG 125).
Ingalls segment operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $55 million, compared to segment operating income of $86 million for the same period in 2022. The decrease was primarily driven by lower risk retirement on USS Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28) and Bougainville (LHA 8).
Newport News revenues, including intersegment sales, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $116 million, or 8%, from the same period in 2022, primarily driven by higher revenues in aircraft carriers and submarines, partially offset by lower revenues in naval nuclear support services. Aircraft carrier revenues increased primarily as a result of higher volumes on the refueling and complex overhaul ("RCOH") of USS John C. Stennis (CVN 74) and the construction of Doris Miller (CVN 81), Enterprise (CVN 80), and John F. Kennedy (CVN 79), partially offset by lower volumes on the RCOH of USS George Washington (CVN 73). Submarine revenues increased due to higher volumes on Block V boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program and the Columbia class (SSBN 826) submarine program, partially offset by lower volumes on Block IV boats of the Virginia class (SSN 774) submarine program. Naval nuclear support services revenues decreased primarily as a result of lower volumes in carrier fleet support services.
Newport News segment operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $84 million, compared to segment operating income of $81 million for the same period in 2022. The increase was primarily due to higher sales volumes, partially offset by unfavorable risk retirement on the Enterprise (CVN 80).
Mission Technologies revenues, including intersegment sales, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $34 million, or 6%, from the same period in 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in mission based solutions and fleet sustainment.
Mission Technologies segment operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $17 million, compared to segment operating income of $9 million for the same period in 2022. The increase was primarily driven by improved performance in mission based solutions and unmanned systems, and higher equity income from nuclear and environmental joint ventures, partially offset by lower performance in fleet sustainment.
The following table presents segment sales and service revenues and segment cost of sales and service revenues by both product and service:
(1) Operating FAS/CAS Adjustment is excluded from segment cost of product sales and service revenues.
Product sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $105 million, or 6%, from the same period in 2022. Product sales at our Ingalls segment decreased $44 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes in amphibious assault ships and the Legend class NSC program, partially offset by higher volumes in surface combatants. Newport News product sales increased $150 million in 2023, primarily as a result of higher volumes in aircraft carriers and submarines. Mission Technologies product sales decreased $1 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes in mission based solutions and unmanned systems, partially offset by higher volumes in fleet sustainment.Segment cost of product sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $115 million, or 8%, compared with the same period in 2022. Cost of product sales at our Ingalls segment decreased $17 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes described above, partially offset by lower risk retirement on USS Fort Lauderdale (LPD 28) following its delivery. Cost of product sales at our Newport News segment increased $133 million in 2023, primarily as a result of higher volumes described above. Cost of product sales at our Mission Technologies segment decreased $1 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes described above.
Service revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023, decreased $7 million, or 1%, compared with the same period in 2022. Service revenues at our Ingalls segment decreased $9 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes in amphibious assault ship services. Service revenues at our Newport News segment decreased $33 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes in naval nuclear support services, partially offset by higher volumes in aircraft carrier and submarine services. Service revenues at our Mission Technologies segment increased $35 million in 2023, primarily as a result of higher volumes in mission based solutions services and fleet sustainment.Segment cost of service revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023, were flat compared with the same period in 2022. Cost of service revenues at our Ingalls segment decreased $9 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes described above. Cost of service revenues at our Newport News segment decreased $27 million in 2023, primarily as a result of lower volumes described above. Cost of service revenues at our Mission Technologies segment increased $36 million in 2023, primarily as a result of higher volumes described above and year-to-year variances in contract mix.
Interest expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $24 million, compared with $26 million for the same period in 2022. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in outstanding long-term debt from the prior year period.
The non-operating retirement benefit includes the following components of net periodic benefit costs: interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of prior service cost (credit) and actuarial loss (gain), and settlement and curtailment effects. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the non-operating retirement benefit was $37 million, compared with $71 million for the same period in 2022. The decrease was primarily driven by lower 2022 returns on plan assets.
Other, net income for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $9 million, compared with other, net expense of $7 million for the same period in 2022. The favorable change was primarily driven by realized and unrealized net gains in investments.
Our effective income tax rates on earnings from operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, were 20.9% and 20.5%, respectively, which did not differ materially from the federal statutory corporate income tax rate of 21%.
Total backlog as of March 31, 2023, and December 31, 2022, was approximately $47.0 billion and $47.1 billion, respectively. Total backlog includes both funded backlog (firm orders for which funding is contractually obligated by the customer) and unfunded backlog (firm orders for which funding is not currently contractually obligated by the customer). Backlog excludes unexercised contract options and unfunded Indefinite Delivery/Indefinite Quantity orders. For contracts having no stated contract values, backlog includes only the amounts committed by the customer. The following table presents funded and unfunded backlog by segment as of March 31, 2023, and December 31, 2022:
We expect approximately 21% of the $47.1 billion total backlog as of December 31, 2022, to be converted into sales in 2023. U.S. Government orders comprised substantially all of the backlog as of March 31, 2023, and December 31, 2022.
The value of new contract awards during the three months ended March 31, 2023, was approximately $2.6 billion, including an award modification for the detail design and construction of LPD 32 (unnamed).
We seek to efficiently convert operating results into cash for deployment in operating our businesses, implementing our business strategy, and maximizing stockholder value. We use various financial measures to assist in capital deployment decision making, including net cash provided by operating activities and free cash flow. We believe these measures are useful to investors in assessing our financial performance. The following table summarizes key components of cash flow provided by operating activities:
We have historically maintained a capital structure comprised of a mix of equity and debt financing. We vary ourleverage both to optimize our equity return and to pursue acquisitions. We expect to meet our current debtobligations as they come due through internally generated funds from current levels of operations and/or through refinancing in the debt markets prior to the maturity dates of our debt.
We discuss below our significant operating, investing, and financing activities affecting cash flows for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, as classified on our unaudited condensed consolidated statements of cash flows.
Cash used in operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $9 million, compared with $83 million used in operating activities for the same period in 2022. The favorable change in operating cash flow was primarily due to a favorable change in trade working capital. The change in trade working capital was primarily driven by the timing of receipts of accounts receivable.We expect cash generated from operations in combination with our current cash and cash equivalents, as well as existing borrowing facilities, to be sufficient to service debt and retiree benefit plans, meet contractual obligations, and fund capital expenditures for at least the next 12 calendar months beginning April 1, 2023, and beyond such 12-month period based on our current business plans.
Cash used in investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $60 million, compared with $43 million used in investing activities for the same period in 2022. The change in investing cash was primarily driven by  increased investment in one of our unconsolidated nuclear and environmental joint ventures. For 2023, we expect our capital expenditures for maintenance and sustainment to be approximately 1.0% of annual revenues and our discretionary capital expenditures to be approximately 2.0% of annual revenues.
Cash used in financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was $80 million, compared with $171 million used in financing activities for the same period in 2022. The change in financing cash was primarily due to a  $90 million decrease in the prepayments of our Term Loan.
Free cash flow represents cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capital expenditures net of related grant proceeds. Free cash flow is not a measure recognized under GAAP. Free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, net earnings as a measure of our performance or net cash provided by operating activities as a measure of our liquidity. We believe free cash flow is an important liquidity measure for our investors because it provides them insight into our current and period-to-period performance and our ability to generate cash from continuing operations. We also use free cash flow as a key operating metric in assessing the performance of our business and as a key performance measure in evaluating management performance and determining incentive compensation. Free cash flow may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table reconciles net cash used in operating activities to free cash flow:
Free cash flow for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $77 million from the same period in 2022, primarily due to a favorable change in trade working capital.
The U.S. Government has the ability, pursuant to regulations relating to contractor business systems, to decrease or withhold contract payments if it determines significant deficiencies exist in one or more such systems. As of March 31, 2023 and 2022, the cumulative amounts of payments withheld by the U.S. Government under our contracts subject to these regulations were not material to our liquidity or cash flows.
In the ordinary course of business, we use letters of credit issued by commercial banks to support certain leases, insurance policies, and contractual performance obligations, as well as surety bonds issued by insurance companies principally to support our self-insured workers' compensation plans. As of March 31, 2023, $14 million in letters of credit were issued but undrawn and $360 million of surety bonds were outstanding. As of March 31, 2023, we had no other significant off-balance sheet arrangements.
See Note 3: Accounting Standards Updates in Part I, Item 1 for information related to accounting standards updates.
Statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q and in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), as well as other statements we may make from time to time, other than statements of historical fact, constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. You can generally identify forward-looking statements by words such as "may," "will," "should," "expects," "intends," "plans," "anticipates," "believes," "estimates," "predicts," "potential," "continue," and similar words or phrases or the negative of these words or phrases. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Although we believe the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable when made, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements. There are a number of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results anticipated by our forward-looking statements, which include, but are not limited to:•Changes in government and customer priorities and requirements (including government budgetary constraints, shifts in defense spending, and changes in customer short-range and long-range plans);•Our ability to estimate our future contract costs, including cost increases due to inflation, and perform our contracts effectively;•Changes in procurement processes and government regulations and our ability to comply with such requirements;•Our ability to deliver our products and services at an affordable life cycle cost and compete within our markets;•Natural and environmental disasters and political instability;•Our ability to execute our strategic plan, including with respect to share repurchases, dividends, capital expenditures, and strategic acquisitions;•Adverse economic conditions in the United States and globally;•Health epidemics, pandemics, and similar outbreaks;•Our ability to attract, train, and retain a qualified workforce;•Disruptions impacting global supply, including those attributable to ongoing public health issues and those resulting from the ongoing conflict between Russia and Ukraine;  •Changes in key estimates and assumptions regarding our pension and retiree health care costs;•Security threats, including cyber security threats, and related disruptions; and•Other risk factors discussed herein and in our other filings with the SEC.Additional factors include those described in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K, including under the captions “Risk Factors,” “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and “Business,” in our subsequent quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, including under the captions “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” and in our subsequent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.There may be other risks and uncertainties that we are unable to predict at this time or that we currently do not expect to have a material adverse effect on our business, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on any forward looking statements that we may make.
Included below are brief descriptions of some of the programs discussed in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.