
Some of the statements contained in this report and documents incorporated by reference herein are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). These statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our or our industry’s actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements may include, but are not limited to, statements regarding:•the ongoing and possible future effects of global challenges, including macroeconomic uncertainties, the war in Ukraine, other economic disruptions and U.S. and global recession concerns, on our customers and suppliers and on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows and our ability to draw down our revolver;•the effect of the worldwide political and social uncertainty and divisions, including the impact on trade regulation and tariffs, that may adversely impact the cost and sale of our products in certain countries, or increase the costs we may incur to purchase materials, parts and equipment from our suppliers;•the ongoing and possible future effects of supply chain constraints, including the availability of critical raw materials and components, including semiconductor chips, as well as cost inflation in materials, packaging and transportation;•the possibility of interruptions or delays at our manufacturing facilities, or the failure to secure alternative suppliers if any of our sole source third-party manufacturers fail to supply us;•the development of new competitive technologies and products;•our ability to predict accurately the demand for our products, and products under development and to develop strategies to address markets successfully;•continued demand for our COVID-19 assays; •the timing, scope and effect of further U.S. and international governmental, regulatory, fiscal, monetary and public health responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and any future public health crises; •potential cybersecurity threats and targeted computer crime;•the ability to execute and integrate acquisitions and the impact and anticipated benefits of completed acquisitions and acquisitions we may complete in the future;•the ability to consolidate certain of our manufacturing and other operations on a timely basis and within budget, without disrupting our business and to achieve anticipated cost synergies related to such actions; •the ability to successfully manage ongoing organizational and strategic changes, including our ability to attract, motivate and retain key employees and maintain engagement and efficiency in remote work environments; •our ability to obtain regulatory approvals and clearances for our products, including the implementation of the European Union Medical Device and In Vitro Diagnostic Regulation requirements, and maintain compliance with complex and evolving regulations; •the coverage and reimbursement decisions of third-party payors; •the uncertainty of the impact of cost containment efforts and federal healthcare reform legislation on our business and results of operations;•the guidelines, recommendations, and studies published by various organizations relating to the use of our products;•the effect of consolidation in the healthcare industry;•our ability to meet production and delivery schedules for our products; •our ability to protect our intellectual property rights; •the possibility that products may contain undetected errors or defects or otherwise not perform as anticipated;•the anticipated development of markets we sell our products into and the success of our products in these markets; •the anticipated performance and benefits of our products; •business strategies; •anticipated trends relating to our financial condition or results of operations, including the impact of interest rate and foreign currency exchange fluctuations;•estimated asset and liability values; •the impact of future tax legislation;•conducting business internationally;•the impact and costs and expenses of any litigation we may be subject to now or in the future; •our compliance with covenants contained in our debt agreements; and•our liquidity, capital resources and the adequacy thereof.In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terms such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “projects,” “predicts,” “likely,” “future,” “strategy,” “potential,” “seeks,” “goal” and similar expressions intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Given these uncertainties, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Also, these forward-looking statements represent our estimates and assumptions only as of the date of this report. Except as otherwise required by law, we expressly disclaim any obligation or undertaking to release publicly any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statement contained in this report to reflect any change in our expectations or any change in events, conditions or circumstances on which any of our forward-looking statements are based. Factors that could cause or contribute to differences in our future financial results include the cautionary statements set forth herein and in our other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including the “Risk Factors” set forth or incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 1A of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, as well as those described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022 or any other of our subsequently filed reports. We qualify all of our forward-looking statements by these cautionary statements.
We are a developer, manufacturer and supplier of premium diagnostics products, medical imaging systems, and surgical products focused on women’s health and well-being through early detection and treatment. We sell and service our products through a combination of direct sales and service personnel and a network of independent distributors and sales representatives. We operate in four segments: Diagnostics, Breast Health, GYN Surgical and Skeletal Health. Through our Diagnostics segment, we offer a wide range of diagnostic products, which are used primarily to aid in the screening and diagnosis of human diseases. Our primary Diagnostics products include our molecular diagnostic assays, which run on our advanced instrumentation systems (Panther, Panther Fusion and Tigris), our ThinPrep cytology system, and the Rapid Fetal Fibronectin Test. Our Aptima family of molecular diagnostic assays is used to detect, among other things, the infectious microorganisms that cause common sexually transmitted diseases, or STDs, such as chlamydia and gonorrhea, or CTGC; certain high-risk strains of human papillomavirus, or HPV; Trichomonas vaginalis, the parasite that causes trichomoniasis; Mycoplasma genitalium; and Herpes Simplex viruses 1 and 2. We also offer viral load tests for the quantitation of Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, or HIV, and human cytomegalo virus, or CMV, for use on our Panther instrument system. In addition, we offer bacterial vaginosis and candida vaginitis assays for the diagnosis of vaginitis, a common and complex ailment affecting millions of women a year. Our assay portfolio also includes diagnostic tests for a range of acute respiratory infections, including SARS-CoV-2, various strains of influenza and parainfluenza, and respiratory syncytial virus that are run on the Panther Fusion system, a field upgradeable instrument addition to the base Panther system. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we developed and launched the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay and the Aptima SARS-CoV-2/Flu assay (each of which runs on our standard Panther system) and the Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay (which runs on our Panther Fusion system). In May 2022, we CE-marked two new molecular assays, Panther Fusion EBV Quant assay for quantitation of Epstein-Barr virus, and the Panther Fusion BKV Quant assay for quantitation of the BK virus. These two new assays are the first quantitative real-time PCR assays on the Panther Fusion system. These assays, along with the Aptima CMV Quant assay, expand our Panther Fusion menu of transplant monitoring assays. The ThinPrep System is primarily used in cytology applications, such as cervical cancer screening, and the Rapid Fetal Fibronectin Test assists physicians in assessing the risk of pre-term birth. We also generate service revenues from our CLIA-certified laboratory for testing related to breast cancer and all metastatic cancers.Our Breast Health segment offers a broad portfolio of solutions for breast cancer care primarily in the areas of radiology, breast surgery, pathology and treatment. These solutions include 3D digital mammography systems, image analytics software utilizing artificial intelligence, reading workstations, ultrasound imaging, minimally invasive breast biopsy guidance systems, breast biopsy site markers, localization, specimen radiology, connectivity solutions and breast conserving surgery products. Our most advanced breast imaging platforms, Selenia Dimensions and 3Dimensions, utilize tomosynthesis to produce 3D images that show multiple contiguous slice images of the breast, which we refer to as the Genius 3D Mammography exam. Our GYN Surgical products include our NovaSure Endometrial Ablation System, or NovaSure, our MyoSure Hysteroscopic Tissue Removal System, or MyoSure, our Fluent Fluid Management system, or Fluent, our Acessa ProVu laparoscopic radiofrequency ablation system, or Acessa ProVu system, as well as our CoolSeal vessel sealing portfolio and our JustRight surgical stapler. The NovaSure portfolio is comprised of the NovaSure CLASSIC and NovaSure ADVANCED devices and most recently, the NovaSure V5 device for the treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding. The MyoSure suite of devices offers four options to provide incision-less removal of fibroids, polyps, and other pathology within the uterus. The Fluent system is a fluid management system that provides liquid distention during diagnostic and operative hysteroscopic procedures. The Acessa ProVu system is a fully integrated system that uses laparoscopic ultrasound, guidance mapping and radio frequency ablation to treat nearly all types of fibroids. The CoolSeal portfolio includes the Trinity, Reveal, and Mini advanced bipolar vessel sealing devices. The JustRight surgical stapler features a smaller instrument profile and is used for laparoscopic general and pediatric surgery.Our Skeletal Health segment’s products includes the Horizon DXA, a dual energy x-ray system, which evaluates bone density and performs body composition assessments, and the Fluoroscan InSight FD mini C-arm, which assists in performing minimally invasive orthopedic surgical procedures on a patient’s extremities, such as the hand, wrist, knee, foot, and ankle.Unless the context otherwise requires, references to we, us, Hologic or our Company refer to Hologic, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The current worldwide supply chain shortages and constraints continue to impact, although to a lesser extent compared to fiscal 2022, our ability to obtain certain critical raw materials and components used primarily in our Breast Health capital equipment products. The supply chain shortages and disruptions primarily affecting our Breast Health manufacturing lines are related to electronic components, primarily semiconductor chips. We are dependent on a small number of semiconductor manufacturers and their allocation of chips to us. Based on our recent experience and current understanding of their allocation of chips to us, we have been able to and expect that we will continue to be able to increase production on a sequential quarterly basis throughout fiscal 2023. If such allocation does not meet our expectations or we are not able to obtain alternative sources of chips, we believe we will not be able to manufacture sufficient quantities of our capital equipment products, primarily 3D Dimension systems, Trident specimen radiography systems and Affirm Prone biopsy systems to meet customer demand and our results of operations would be adversely affected. In addition, the prices of raw materials and components, as well as freight, have been rising due to certain supply chain shortages as well as inflation and could increase the costs further. Our procurement team has and will continue to expend significant time and resources to try to secure sufficient quantities to meet demand.
Hologic is a trademark of Hologic, Inc. Other trademarks, logos, and slogans registered or used by Hologic and its divisions and subsidiaries in the United States and other countries include, but are not limited to, the following: 3Dimensions, 3D Mammography, Acessa, Acessa ProVu, Affirm, Amplidiag, Aptima, ATEC, Biotheranostics, Brevera, CoolSeal, Diagenode, Eviva, Faxitron, Fluent, Fluoroscan, Focal, Genius 3D, Genius 3D Mammography, Horizon , InSight, JustRight, Mobidiag, MyoSure, Novodiag, NovaSure, Panther, Panther Fusion, Rapid fFN, Selenia, Selenia Dimensions, Somatex, SuperSonic Imagine, ThinPrep, Tigris, Trident, and Tumark. All other brand names or trademarks appearing in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q are the property of their respective owners. Hologic’s use or display of other parties’ trademarks, trade dress or products in this Quarterly Report does not imply that Hologic has a relationship with, or endorsement or sponsorship of, the trademark or trade dress owners.
On November 29, 2021, we completed the acquisition of Bolder Surgical Holdings, Inc., or Bolder, for a purchase price of $160.1 million. Bolder, located in Louisville, Colorado, is a developer and manufacturer of energy vessel sealing surgical devices used in both laparoscopic and open procedures. Based on our valuation, we allocated $96.7 million of the purchase price to the value of intangible assets and $68.8 million to goodwill. Bolder’s results of operations are reported in our GYN Surgical segment.
All dollar amounts in tables are presented in millions.
We had a decrease in product revenues in both the current three and six month periods of 34.0% and 33.0%, respectively, compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year. This was primarily due to the decrease in revenues in the Diagnostics business as COVID-19 assay sales declined significantly. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in Breast Health revenue as supply chain constraints begin to ease, an increase in GYN Surgical revenues, as well as an extra week of activity in the current six month period compared to the corresponding period in the prior year due to our fiscal calendar.Diagnostics product revenues decreased $528.2 million and $925.4 million, or 54.7% and 48.9%, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to a decrease in Molecular Diagnostics of $526.3 million and $920.7 million, respectively, a decrease in Cytology and Perinatal of $3.1 million and $6.9 million, respectively, partially offset by an increase in Blood Screening of $1.3 million and $2.3 million respectively. Molecular Diagnostics product revenue was $316.6 million and $717.0 million, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to $842.9 million and $1,637.7 million, respectively, in the corresponding periods in the prior year. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease of $512.9 million and $908.8 million, respectively, in sales from our two SARS-CoV-2 assays (primarily the Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assay and to a lesser extent the Panther Fusion SARS-CoV-2 assay) due to lower volumes, which we primarily attribute to lower demand from an improvement in the COVID-19 pandemic compared to the prior year, the increasing use of rapid tests and a decrease in average selling prices in international markets. We expect sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays to continue to be significantly lower in fiscal 2023 compared to fiscal 2022. We also had a decrease in sales of collection devices as a result of lower assay sales, and lower Panther instruments sales as demand for those instruments has decreased, which we primarily attribute to our significantly expanded install base and the decline in the COVID-19 pandemic in the current year. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in sales of $24.0 million and $44.8 million in the current three and six month periods, respectively, from our Aptima assays, (exclusive of our Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assays), primarily driven by an increase in our CV Candida, Bacterial Vaginosis, and CTGC assay volumes. This increase was primarily due to expanded adoption by our laboratory customers. In addition, we had an increase in sales of our Fusion respiratory assays and Quant Viral assays, primarily HIV sold in Africa. The decrease in Cytology & Perinatal was primarily due to a decrease in sales in China, which we primarily attribute to COVID-19 related shutdowns. Breast Health product revenues increased $61.8 million and $24.2 million, or 35.7% and 6.2%, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to an increase in volumes of our digital mammography systems, primarily 3D Dimensions systems and related workstation and workflow products including software, an increase in average selling prices for 3D Dimensions systems, and an increase in Trident systems unit sales. The increase in volume was primarily driven by the ease in supply chain constraints related to electronic components, primarily semiconductor chips, which impacted our ability to manufacture sufficient quantities to meet customer demand in the prior year. The increase in capital equipment sales in the current six month period was partially offset by lower sales of the Affirm Prone biopsy systems. In addition, we had an increase in sales of our interventional breast solutions products in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily driven by Brevera systems and related needles. We also experienced a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies.GYN Surgical product revenues increased $26.2 million and $45.5 million, or 22.4% and 18.1%, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to increases in the sales volume of our MyoSure systems, NovaSure systems, and Fluent Fluid Management disposables as procedure rates continue to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and to a lesser extent an increase in sales volume of our CoolSeal vessel sealers. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies.Skeletal Health product revenues increased $9.4 million and $7.9 million, or 69.6% and 23.9%, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to an increase in sales volume of our Horizon DXA systems, InSight FD Fluoroscan systems, and system upgrades. The sales volume increases were largely associated with the easing of supply chain constraints. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in revenue from international sales denominated in foreign currencies from the unfavorable foreign currency exchange impact of the strengthened U.S. dollar against a number of currencies.Product revenues by geography as a percentage of total product revenues were as follows:
In the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year, the percentage of product revenue derived from the U.S. increased while Europe and Asia-Pacific decreased, which we primarily attribute to a larger increase in the U.S. for Breast Health capital equipment and related workflow and workstation products including software, Aptima and Fusion assay sales (exclusive of our Aptima SARS-CoV-2 assays), as well as a lesser decline in SARS-CoV-2 assay volume compared to Europe and Asia-Pacific. Product revenue decreased in China, which we primarily attribute to continued surges of COVID-19 and related shutdowns, which primarily impacted the sale of our Diagnostics products (excluding SARS-CoV-2 assays) and digital mammography systems. In addition, the strengthening of the U.S. dollar against a number of currencies contributed to the increase in the percentage of revenue derived from the U.S. compared to revenue derived from the other geographic regions.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1, 2023March 26, 2022ChangeApril 1, 2023March 26, 2022Change Amount% ofTotalRevenueAmount% ofTotalRevenueAmount%Amount% ofTotalRevenueAmount% ofTotalRevenueAmount%Service and Other Revenues$189.1 18.4 %$167.5 11.7 %$21.6 12.9 %$376.9 17.9 %$335.3 11.5 %$41.6 12.4 %Service and other revenues consist primarily of revenue generated from our field service organization to provide ongoing service, installation, and repair of our products. The majority of these revenues are generated within our Breast Health segment. The increase in service and other revenue in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year was primarily due to the continued conversion of a high percentage of our installed base of digital mammography systems to service contracts upon expiration of the warranty period, an increase in service contract pricing and higher spare parts. In the current six month period, revenues were also higher from the extra week of service contract activity, resulting in $7.9 million of incremental revenue. In our Diagnostics business, service revenue increased as a result of higher lab testing volumes from our Biotheranostics business.
Cost of Product Revenues. The cost of product revenues as a percentage of product revenues was 34.9% and 34.1%, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to 25.4% and 24.9%, respectively, in the corresponding periods in the prior year. Cost of product revenues as a percentage of revenue increased in the current three and six month periods primarily due to a decrease in sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays, which have higher gross margins compared to our other diagnostic products, and comprised 8.5% and 11.5%, respectively, of total product revenue in the current three and six month periods compared to 46.0% and 43.0%, respectively, in the corresponding periods in the prior year. Higher product costs from supply chain constraints and inflation also contributed to the increase in the cost of product revenue. This increase was partially offset by higher sales of our digital mammography systems and related software products and a decrease in inventory reserves in the current three month period.Diagnostics’ product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to lower sales of our SARS-CoV-2 assays, unfavorable manufacturing variances at certain of our manufacturing facilities, an increase in scrap and higher field service costs from our expanded instrument installed base, partially offset by an increase in core Aptima, Fusion, and Quant Viral assay volume, a decrease in inventory reserves and lower freight internationally.Breast Health’s product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to higher sales volumes of our higher margin products, primarily 3D Dimensions, which also experienced an increase in average selling prices, and improved manufacturing utilization partially offset by a slight decline in average selling prices of our biopsy disposables, higher prices of raw materials and components from supply chain constraints and inflation, an increase in inventory reserves and an increase in freight.GYN Surgical’s product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in the current three month period compared to the corresponding period in the prior year primarily due to an increase in volume of higher margin products, primarily MyoSure and NovaSure, as procedure rates continue to recover from the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in the current six month period compared to the corresponding period in the prior year primarily due to product mix of higher volumes of lower margin products, mostly attributable to sales of our Fluent Fluid Management systems and CoolSeal vessel sealers, partially offset by higher average selling prices of our NovaSure V5 device.Skeletal Health’s product costs as a percentage of revenue decreased in the current three month period compared to the corresponding period in the prior year primarily due to an increase in volume of Horizon DXA systems and upgrades as well as an increase in average selling prices of Horizon DXA and Insight FD Fluoroscan systems. Product costs as a percentage of revenue increased in the current six month period compared to the corresponding period in the prior year due to higher component costs from supply chain constraints and inflation partially offset by an increase in volume of Horizon DXA systems and upgrades as well as an increase in average selling prices of Horizon DXA and Insight FD Fluoroscan systems.Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets relates to acquired developed technology, which is generally amortized over its estimated useful life of between 5 and 15 years using a straight-line method or, if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets are expected to be consumed. Amortization expense decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to lower amortization of intangible assets acquired in the Cytyc acquisition which became fully amortized in the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2023 and to a lesser extent, lower amortization of intangible assets acquired in the Focal and Faxitron acquisitions due to impairments in the prior year, partially offset by an increase from developed technology intangible assets acquired in the Bolder acquisition.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1, 2023March 26, 2022ChangeApril 1, 2023March 26, 2022Change Amount% ofServiceRevenueAmount% ofServiceRevenueAmount%Amount% ofServiceRevenueAmount% ofServiceRevenueAmount%Cost of Service and Other Revenue$96.5 51.0 %$94.2 56.2 %$2.3 2.4 %$201.0 53.3 %$186.1 55.5 %$14.9 8.0 %Service and other revenues gross margin increased to 49.0% and 46.7%, respectively, in the current three and six month periods compared to 43.8% and 44.5%, respectively, in the corresponding periods in the prior year. The increase in the current three and six month periods was primarily due to an increase in lab testing revenue from Biotheranostics, which has higher margins than our legacy service business, and an increase in the average selling prices and attachment rates of our Breast Health service contracts and time and material billings.
** Percentage not meaningfulResearch and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased 6.5% and 4.6% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to a lower credits of $5.3 million and $3.8 million in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year, recorded for funds received from the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) grant to obtain FDA approval of our SARS-CoV-2 assays. In addition, the current six month period included an extra week of compensation and benefits. Partially offsetting these increases was a reduction in certain project spend. At any point in time, we have a number of different research projects and clinical trials being conducted and the timing of these projects and related costs can vary from period to period.Selling and Marketing Expenses. Selling and marketing expenses decreased 16.9% and 4.0% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year. The decrease was primarily due to lower spending on advertising and marketing initiatives as the prior year periods included spend on our Super Bowl commercial and a larger sponsorship amount for the Women’s Tennis Association and grants supporting women’s health initiatives. These decreases were partially offset by higher compensation and benefits primarily from an increase in commissions expense as sales were higher for our Breast Health and Surgical businesses and to a lesser extent an increase in headcount, and an increase in travel and meetings. In the current six month period, the decrease in expenses was also partially offset by an extra week of compensation and benefits and an increase in severance expense. General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses increased 0.3% and decreased 4.2% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year. The increase in the current three month period was primarily due to an increase in compensation and benefits from higher expense from our deferred compensation plan due to stock market gains and an increase in stock compensation partially offset by a decrease in non-income tax charges and a decrease in charitable donations of $2.0 million. The decrease in the current six month period was primarily due to a decrease in charitable donations of $12.0 million, a $7.4 million settlement awarded in the Minerva litigation received in the first quarter of fiscal 2023, lower tax project and legal expenses, and a decrease in bad debt expense. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in compensation and benefits from higher expense from our deferred compensation plan due to stock market gains and an increase in stock compensation, an $8.9 million charge to settle a business dispute in connection with terminating the Mobidiag joint venture agreement in China, an increase in reserves for sales and use tax matters, higher travel, an increase in information systems infrastructure costs and higher compensation and benefits from the extra week in the current six month period.Amortization of Intangible Assets. Amortization of intangible assets primarily results from customer relationships and trade names related to our acquisitions. These intangible assets are generally amortized over their estimated useful lives of between 5 and 30 years using a straight-line method or, if reliably determinable, based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets are expected to be consumed utilizing expected undiscounted future cash flows. Amortization expense decreased in the current year periods primarily due to assets from our Cytyc acquisition becoming fully amortized at the beginning of the first quarter of fiscal 2023. Contingent Consideration Fair Value Adjustments. In connection with the acquisition of Acessa Health, Inc., or Acessa, we are obligated to make contingent earn-out payments. The payments are based on achieving incremental revenue growth over a three-year period ending annually in December of each of 2021, 2022, and 2023. As of the acquisition date, we recorded a contingent consideration liability for the estimated fair value of the amount we expected to pay to the former shareholders of the acquired business. This liability is not contingent on future employment, and we recorded our estimate of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation based on future revenue projections of Acessa, comparable company revenue growth rates, implied volatility and applying a risk adjusted discount rate. Increases or decreases in the fair value of contingent consideration liability can result from the passage of time, changes in discount rates, and changes in the timing, probabilities and amount of revenue estimates. In the second quarter of fiscal 2023, we recorded a gain of $12.4 million based on a decrease in forecasted revenues over the remaining earn-out period. In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we recorded a gain of $4.1 million based on actual amounts owed for the first earn-out period being lower than the amount accrued as of September 25, 2021.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1,2023March 26,2022ChangeApril 1,2023March 26,2022Change AmountAmountAmount%AmountAmountAmount%Interest Income$31.5 $0.8 $30.7 **$52.1 $1.2 $50.9 **** Percentage not meaningfulInterest income increased significantly in the current year periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year due to the significant increase in interest rates over the past twelve months as the U.S. Federal Reserve began periodically raising its Federal Funds Rate starting in March 2022. To a lesser extent, the increase in interest income was due to higher average cash balances in the current year periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1,2023March 26,2022ChangeApril 1,2023March 26,2022Change AmountAmountAmount%AmountAmountAmount%Interest Expense$(27.2)$(22.6)$(4.6)20.4 %$(55.3)$(48.3)$(7.0)14.6 %Interest expense consists primarily of the cash interest costs and the related amortization of the debt discount and deferred issuance costs on our outstanding debt. Interest expense increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to an increase in the variable interest rate, SOFR, under our 2021 Credit Agreement partially offset by amounts received under our interest rate swap, which hedges the benchmark interest rate, versus payments made under the interest rate swap in the prior year period. In addition, the prior year interest expense included debt refinancing costs for our 2021 Credit Agreement, and interest expense related to debt acquired in the Mobidiag acquisition that was paid off in the prior year.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1,2023March 26,2022ChangeApril 1,2023March 26,2022Change AmountAmountAmount%AmountAmountAmount%Debt Extinguishment Loss$— $— $— — %$— $(0.7)$0.7 (100.0)%In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we entered into a Refinancing Amendment to our 2021 Credit Agreement with Bank of America, N.A. The proceeds were used to pay off the term loan outstanding under our 2018 Credit Agreement. In connection with this transaction we recorded a debt extinguishment charge of $0.7 million.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1,2023March 26,2022ChangeApril 1,2023March 26,2022Change AmountAmountAmount%AmountAmountAmount%Other Income (Expense), net$2.9 $2.1 $0.8 38.1 %$(12.9)$8.7 $(21.6)****Percentage not meaningfulFor the current three month period, this account primarily consisted of a gain of $2.8 million from the change in cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan driven by stock market gains, partially offset by net foreign currency exchange losses of $0.3 million. For the second quarter of fiscal 2022, this account primarily consisted of net foreign currency exchange gains of $3.3 million, primarily from settling hedging transactions, and a $2.4 million gain on life insurance proceeds as a result of the death of a former employee, partially offset by a loss of $3.5 million from the change in cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan driven by stock market losses.For the current six month period, this account primarily consisted of net foreign currency exchange losses of $18.4 million, primarily from the mark-to-market of foreign currency contracts used to hedge operating results, partially offset by a gain of $5.3 million from the change in cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan driven by stock market gains. For the corresponding six month period in the prior year, this account primarily consisted of net foreign currency exchange gains of $12.6 million, primarily from settling transactions, and a $2.4 million gain on life insurance proceeds, partially offset by a charge of $4.3 million to write off an equity method investment acquired in the Mobidiag acquisition and a loss of $2.2 million from the change in cash surrender value of life insurance contracts related to our deferred compensation plan driven by stock market losses.
Three Months EndedSix Months Ended April 1,2023March 26,2022ChangeApril 1,2023March 26,2022Change AmountAmountAmount%AmountAmountAmount%Provision for Income Taxes$60.8 $118.7 $(57.9)(48.8)%$112.5 $241.4 $(128.9)(53.4)%Our effective tax rates for the three and six months ended April 1, 2023 were 21.8% and 21.7%, respectively, compared to 20.7% and 20.2% for the corresponding periods in the prior year.Our effective tax rates for the three and six months ended April 1, 2023 were higher than the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to income tax reserves, the global intangible low-taxed income inclusion, and state income taxes, partially offset by the impact of the U.S. deduction for foreign derived intangible income, the geographic mix of income earned by our international subsidiaries, which are taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, and federal and state tax credits.Our effective tax rates for the three and six months ended March 26, 2022 were lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate primarily due to the impact of the U.S. deduction for foreign derived intangible income and the geographic mix of income earned by our international subsidiaries, which are taxed at rates lower than the U.S. statutory tax rate, partially offset by state income taxes.
We operate in four segments: Diagnostics, Breast Health, GYN Surgical and Skeletal Health. The accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022. We measure segment performance based on total revenues and operating income. Revenues from product sales of each of these segments are described in further detail above. The discussion that follows is a summary analysis of total revenues and the primary changes in operating income or loss by segment.
Diagnostics revenues decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to the decrease in product revenues discussed above, partially offset by higher lab testing revenue from our Biotheranostics business. Operating income for this business segment decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year due to a decrease in gross profit from lower COVID-19 assay sales partially offset by a decrease in operating expenses. Gross margin was 55.0% and 56.6% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to 71.8% and 72.3% in the corresponding periods in the prior year, respectively. The decrease in gross profit in the current three and six month periods was primarily due to lower sales volumes of our SARS-CoV-2 assays which have a higher margin, unfavorable manufacturing variances at certain of our manufacturing facilities, an increase in scrap, and higher field service costs from our expanded instrument installed base, partially offset by increases in core Aptima, Fusion and Quant Viral assay volumes, a decrease in inventory reserves, higher lab testing revenue and a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense and lower freight internationally.Operating expenses decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to a decrease in marketing initiatives and allocated advertising and charitable contributions, a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense, and a decrease in commissions. Partially offsetting these decreases was a decrease in the BARDA credit, an increase in research and development project spend, an increase in travel and meeting expenses and an increase in compensation and benefits from the extra week in the current six month period. Also partially offsetting these decreases in the current six month period compared to the corresponding period in the prior year is a settlement charge of $8.9 million related to the termination of the Mobidiag joint venture in China.
Breast Health revenues increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year due to an increase in product and service revenue discussed above.Operating income for this business segment increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to an increase in product sales, a decrease in operating expenses and an increase in service gross profit. Gross margin was 57.3% and 55.8% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to 53.4% and 54.6% in the corresponding periods in the prior year, respectively. The increase in gross margin is primarily due to higher volumes of our capital equipment and related software sales, and interventional breast solutions devices, an increase in service margin from the continued conversion of digital mammography systems to service contracts and to a lesser extent the extra week in the current six month period, partially offset by higher costs for raw materials and components from supply chain constraints and inflation, an increase in inventory reserves and an increase in freight.Operating expenses decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to a decrease in marketing initiatives and allocated advertising and charitable contributions and lower research and development project spend, partially offset by an increase in commission expense from higher sales, an increase in travel and meetings and higher restructuring costs. In addition, there was an increase in compensation and benefits from the extra week in the current six month period.
GYN Surgical revenues increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to the increase in product revenues discussed above. Operating income for this business segment increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to an increase in gross profit and to a lesser extent a decrease in operating expenses. Gross margin was 67.9% and 68.3% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to 56.4% and 59.5% in the corresponding periods in the prior year, respectively. The increase in gross margin was primarily due to a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense and an increase in higher margin product sales in the current three month period, partially offset by an increase in lower margin product sales in the current six month period discussed above.Operating expenses decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to a gain of $12.4 million recorded in the current three month period to decrease the contingent consideration liability to fair value related to the Acessa acquisition compared to a gain of $4.1 million recorded in the prior year six month period, a decrease in intangible asset amortization expense, and lower marketing initiative spend. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in compensation and benefits primarily due to an increase in commissions and higher salaries and an increase in travel and meeting expenses. In addition, in the current six month period we received $7.4 million in infringement damages from the Minerva litigation, which was recorded as a credit to general and administrative expenses.
** Percentage not meaningfulSkeletal Health revenues increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to the increase in product revenues discussed above and to a lesser extent the increase in service contract revenue from the extra week in the current six month period.Operating income for this business segment increased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to an increase in gross profit and a decrease in operating expenses. Gross margin was 35.6% and 33.0% in the current three and six month periods, respectively, compared to 30.4% and 33.5% in the corresponding periods in the prior year, respectively. The increase in gross margin in the current three month period was primarily due to an increase in product and service revenues partially offset by increased costs from supply chain constraints and inflation. The decrease in gross margin in the current six month period was primarily due to increased costs from supply chain constraints and inflation.Operating expenses decreased in the current three and six month periods compared to the corresponding periods in the prior year primarily due to a decrease in research and development project spend and marketing initiatives partially offset by an increase in commissions from higher sales.
At April 1, 2023, we had $3,256.4 million of working capital and our cash and cash equivalents totaled $2,582.2 million. Our cash and cash equivalents increased by $242.7 million during the first six months of fiscal 2023 primarily due to cash generated from operating activities, partially offset by cash used in investing and financing activities primarily related to repurchases of our common stock and capital expenditures.In the first six months of fiscal 2023, our operating activities provided cash of $459.7 million, primarily due to net income of $405.9 million, non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization aggregating $166.7 million, and stock-based compensation expense of $43.7 million. These adjustments to net income were partially offset by a decrease in deferred taxes of $61.6 million primarily due to the capitalization of research expenditures under the tax rules and to a lesser extent the amortization of intangible assets. Cash provided by operations included a net cash outflow of $112.2 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. The net cash outflow was primarily driven by an increase of $81.8 million in accounts receivable due to the timing of billings for service contracts as well as higher sales of capital equipment in the second quarter of fiscal 2023 in our Breast Health division compared to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, an increase in inventory of $56.1 million principally due to the strategic buildup of emergency sourced components for our Breast Health business to hedge against the continuing worldwide supply constraints, a $22.4 million decrease in accrued expenses primarily due to net payments of the annual bonus and commissions partially offset by the timing of income tax and value-added tax payments, and a $13.2 million decrease in accounts payable due to the timing of payments. These cash outflows were partially offset by an increase of $42.5 million in deferred revenue primarily due to billings for annual service contracts, a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $10.5 million primarily due to the Department of Defense reimbursement received in the second quarter partially offset by normal amortization related to the Women’s Tennis Association sponsorship and service and software subscriptions, and a decrease in prepaid income taxes of $8.3 million primarily due to timing of tax payments relative to the provision for income taxes.In the first six months of fiscal 2023, our investing activities used cash of $57.4 million primarily due to capital expenditures of $61.2 million, which primarily consisted of the placement of equipment under customer usage agreements and purchase of manufacturing equipment and to a lesser extent building improvements, and $10.0 million for the purchase of an equity investment. These uses of cash were partially offset by a final reimbursement of $20.5 million received from the Department of Defense under a grant to increase production capacity of our two SARS-CoV-2 assays.In the first six months of fiscal 2023, our financing activities used cash of $163.0 million primarily due to $150.0 million for repurchases of our common stock and $23.2 million for the payment of employee taxes withheld for the net share settlement of vested restricted stock units. Partially offsetting these uses of cash were $28.4 million from our equity plans, primarily from the exercise of stock options.
We had total recorded debt outstanding of $2.82 billion at April 1, 2023, which was comprised of amounts outstanding under our 2021 Credit Agreement of $1.49 billion (principal of $1.5 billion), 2029 Senior Notes of $937.7 million (principal of $950.0 million), and 2028 Senior Notes of $396.4 million (principal of $400.0 million).
On September 27, 2021, we refinanced our existing term loan and revolving credit facility with Bank of America, N.A. in its capacity as Administrative Agent, Swing Line Lender and L/C Issuer, and certain other lenders from time to time party thereto (the “2018 Credit Agreement”) by entering into a Refinancing Amendment (the “2021 Credit Agreement”). Borrowings under the 2021 Credit Agreement are secured by first-priority liens on, and a first priority security interest in, substantially all of our and our Subsidiary Guarantors’ U.S. assets. The credit facilities (the “2021 Credit Facilities”) under the 2021 Credit Agreement consist of:•A $1.5 billion secured term loan (“2021 Term Loan”) with a stated maturity date of September 25, 2026; and•A secured revolving credit facility (the “2021 Revolver”) under which the Borrowers may borrow up to $2.0 billion, subject to certain sublimits, with a stated maturity date of September 25, 2026.As of April 1, 2023, the principal amount outstanding under the 2021 Term Loan was $1.5 billion, no amounts were outstanding under the 2021 Revolver, and the full amount of the 2021 Revolver was available to be borrowed by the Company.On August 22, 2022, we further amended the 2021 Credit Agreement to address the planned phase out of LIBOR by the UK Financial Conduct Authority. Under this amendment, the interest rate applicable to the loans under the 2021 Credit Agreement denominated in U.S. dollars were converted to a variant of the secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”) plus an applicable spread. As of April 1, 2023, the interest rate under the 2021 Term Loan was 5.91% per annum.We are also required to pay a quarterly commitment fee calculated on a daily basis equal to the Applicable Rate as of such day multiplied by the undrawn committed amount available under the 2021 Revolver. As of April 1, 2023, this commitment fee was 0.15% per annum. We are required to make scheduled principal payments under the 2021 Term Loan in increasing amounts ranging from $3.75 million per three-month period commencing with the three-month period ended on December 29, 2022 to $18.75 million per three-month period commencing with the three-month period ending on December 26, 2025. The remaining scheduled balance of $1.335 billion (or such lesser aggregate principal amount then outstanding) on the 2021 Term Loan and any amounts outstanding under the 2021 Revolver are due at their respective maturities. In addition, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the 2021 Credit Agreement, we may be required to make certain mandatory prepayments from the net proceeds of specified types of asset sales (subject to certain reinvestment rights), debt issuances (excluding permitted debt) and insurance recoveries (subject to certain reinvestment rights). Certain of the mandatory prepayments are subject to reduction or elimination if certain financial covenants are met. Subject to certain limitations, we may voluntarily prepay any of the 2021 Credit Facilities without premium or penalty.The 2021 Credit Agreement contains affirmative and negative covenants customarily applicable to senior secured credit facilities, including the requirement that we maintain certain financial ratios. As of April 1, 2023, we were in compliance with these covenants.
The total aggregate principal balance of the 2028 Senior Notes is $400.0 million. The 2028 Senior Notes are general senior unsecured obligations and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain of our domestic subsidiaries. The 2028 Senior Notes mature on February 1, 2028 and bear interest at the rate of 4.625% per year, payable semi-annually on February 1 and August 1 of each year. We have the option to redeem the 2028 Senior Notes on or after: February 1, 2023 through February 1, 2024 at 102.312% of par; February 1, 2024 through February 1, 2025 at 101.541% of par; February 1, 2025 through February 1, 2026 at 100.770% of par; and February 1, 2026 and thereafter at 100% of par. In addition, if there is a change of control coupled with a decline in ratings, as provided in the indenture, we will be required to make an offer to purchase each holder’s 2028 Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date.
The total aggregate principal balance of the 2029 Senior Notes is $950.0 million. The 2029 Senior Notes are general senior unsecured obligations and are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by certain domestic subsidiaries. The 2029 Senior Notes mature on February 15, 2029 and bear interest at the rate of 3.250% per year, payable semi-annually on February 15 and August 15 of each year. We may redeem the 2029 Senior Notes at any time prior to September 28, 2023 at a price equal to 100% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date and a make-whole premium set forth in the indenture. We may also redeem up to 40% of the aggregate principal amount of the 2029 Senior Notes with the net cash proceeds of certain equity offerings at any time and from time to time before September 28, 2023, at a redemption price equal to 103.250% of the aggregate principal amount so redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. We have the option to redeem the 2029 Senior Notes on or after: September 28, 2023 through September 27, 2024 at 101.625% of par; September 28, 2024 through September 27, 2025 at 100.813% of par; and September 28, 2025 and thereafter at 100% of par. In addition, if there is a change of control coupled with a decline in ratings, as provided in the indenture, we will be required to make an offer to purchase each holder’s 2029 Senior Notes at a price equal to 101% of their principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the repurchase date.
Currently, our only contingent consideration liability is related to our Acessa acquisition. We have an obligation to the former Acessa shareholders to make contingent payments based on a multiple of annual incremental revenue growth over a three-year period ending annually in December. There is no maximum earnout. Pursuant to ASC 805, Business Combinations, the contingent consideration was deemed to be part of the purchase price, and we recorded our estimate of the fair value of the contingent consideration liability utilizing the Monte Carlo simulation based on future revenue projections of the business, comparable companies’ revenue growth rates, implied volatility and applying a risk adjusted discount rate. The first earn-out period was completed in December 2021, and we paid $12.2 million to the former shareholders in the second quarter of fiscal 2022. The second earn-out period was completed in December 2022, resulting in a payment amount of $7.6 million in the second quarter of fiscal 2023. During the second quarter of fiscal 2023, we updated our forecasted revenue and recorded a gain of $12.4 million to record the liability to fair value. The reduction in fair value was primarily due to a decrease in forecasted revenues. As of April 1, 2023, the contingent consideration liability was recorded at its fair value of $3.4 million.
On September 22, 2022, the Board of Directors authorized a stock repurchase program, with a five-year term, to repurchase up to $1.0 billion of our outstanding common stock, effective as of the close of trading September 23, 2022. This repurchase program replaced the previous $1.0 billion authorization. During the three and six months ended April 1, 2023, we repurchased 0.6 million and 2.2 million shares of our common stock for total consideration of $50.0 million and $150.0 million, respectively. As of April 1, 2023, $850.0 million remained available under this authorization. The timing of the share repurchases will be based upon our continuing analysis of market, financial, and other factors. Repurchases under the authorized share repurchase plan may be made using a variety of methods, which may include, but are not limited to, open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase agreements, or purchases pursuant to a Rule 10b5-1 plan under the Exchange Act. The authorized share repurchase plan may be suspended, delayed or discontinued at any time.
We are currently involved in several legal proceedings and claims. In connection with these legal proceedings and claims, management periodically reviews estimates of potential costs to be incurred by us in connection with the adjudication or settlement, if any, of these proceedings. These estimates are developed, as applicable in consultation with outside counsel, and are based on an analysis of potential litigation outcomes and settlement strategies. In accordance with ASC 450, Contingencies, loss contingencies are accrued if, in the opinion of management, an adverse outcome is probable and such financial outcome can be reasonably estimated. It is possible that future results for any particular quarter or annual period may be materially affected by changes in our assumptions or the effectiveness of our strategies relating to these proceedings. Information with respect to this disclosure may be found in Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, which information is incorporated herein by reference.
We expect to continue to review and evaluate potential strategic transactions that we believe will complement our current or future business. Subject to the “Risk Factors” set forth or incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 1A of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, as well as those described in Part I, Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022 or any other of our subsequently filed reports, and the general disclaimers set forth in our “Cautionary Statement” regarding forward-looking statements at the outset of this Item 2, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operations, and the cash available under our 2021 Revolver will provide us with sufficient funds in order to fund our expected normal operations and debt payments over the next twelve months. Our longer-term liquidity is contingent upon future operating performance. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund capital expenditures, repayment of debt, acquisitions, strategic transactions or other investments. As described above, we have significant indebtedness outstanding under our 2021 Credit Agreement, 2028 Senior Notes, and 2029 Senior Notes. These capital requirements could be substantial. For a description of risks to our operating performance and our indebtedness, see the “Risk Factors” set forth or incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 1A of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, as well as those described in Part I, Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our interim consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition for multiple element arrangements, allowance for doubtful accounts, reserves for excess and obsolete inventories, valuations, purchase price allocations and contingent consideration related to business combinations, expected future cash flows including growth rates, discount rates, terminal values and other assumptions used to evaluate the recoverability of long-lived assets and goodwill, estimated fair values of intangible assets and goodwill, amortization methods and periods, warranty reserves, certain accrued expenses, restructuring and other related charges, stock-based compensation, contingent liabilities, tax reserves and recoverability of our net deferred tax assets and related valuation allowances. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ from these estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate. Any differences may have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations. For a discussion of how these and other factors may affect our business, see the “Cautionary Statement” regarding forward-looking statements set forth at the outset of this Item 2 and the “Risk Factors” set forth or incorporated by reference in Part II, Item 1A of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q as well as those described in Part I, Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022 or any other of our subsequently filed reports.The critical accounting estimates that we believe affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements presented in this report are described in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022. There have been no material changes to our critical accounting policies or estimates from those set forth in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 24, 2022.