
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. Host Inc. operates as a self-managed and self-administered REIT. Host Inc. is the sole general partner of Host L.P. and holds approximately 99% of its partnership interests. Host L.P. is a limited partnership operating through an umbrella partnership structure. The remaining common OP units are owned by various unaffiliated limited partners.
In this quarterly report on Form 10-Q, we make forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements are identified by their use of terms and phrases such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “expect,” “may,” “intend,” “predict,” “project,” “plan,” “will,” “estimate” and other similar terms and phrases, including references to assumptions and forecasts of future results. Forward-looking statements are based on management’s current expectations and assumptions and are not guarantees of future performance. Forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors which may cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated at the time the forward-looking statements are made. The following factors, among others, could cause actual results and future events to differ materially from those set forth or contemplated in the forward-looking statements: •the effect on lodging demand of (i) changes in national and local economic and business conditions, including concerns about U.S. economic growth and the potential for an economic recession in the United States or globally, the current high level of inflation, rising interest rates, global economic prospects, consumer confidence and the value of the U.S. dollar, and (ii) factors that may shape public perception of travel to a particular location, such as natural disasters, weather events (including Hurricane Ian in 2022), pandemics and other public health crises, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and the occurrence or potential occurrence of terrorist attacks, all of which will affect occupancy rates at our hotels and the demand for hotel products and services; •the impact of geopolitical developments outside the United States, such as large-scale wars or international conflicts, slowing global growth, or trade tensions and tariffs between the United States and its trading partners such as China, all of which could affect global travel and lodging demand within the United States; •volatility in global financial and credit markets, including volatility caused by recent failures of several financial institutions and liquidity concerns at other financial institutions, which could materially adversely affect U.S. and global economic conditions, business activity, and lodging demand as well as negatively impact our ability to obtain financing and increase our borrowing costs; •pending and future U.S. governmental action to address the U.S. debt ceiling and the potential for a United States default on its debt obligations, the impact of budget deficits generally and pending and future U.S. governmental action to address such deficits through reductions in spending and similar austerity measures, as well as the impact of potential U.S. government shutdowns, all of which could materially adversely affect U.S. economic conditions, business activity, credit availability and borrowing costs;  •operating risks associated with the hotel business, including the effect of labor stoppages or strikes, increasing operating or labor costs, including increased labor costs in the current inflationary environment, the ability of our managers to adequately staff our hotels as a result of shortages in labor, severance and furlough payments to hotel employees or changes in workplace rules that affect labor costs, and risks relating to the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic by our hotel managers, such as increased hotel costs for cleaning protocols; •the effect of rating agency downgrades of our debt securities or on the cost and availability of new debt financings; •the reduction in our operating flexibility and the limitation on our ability to incur debt, pay dividends and make distributions resulting from restrictive covenants in our debt agreements and other risks associated with the amount of our indebtedness or related to restrictive covenants in our debt agreements, including the risk that a default could occur; •our ability to maintain our hotels in a first-class manner, including meeting capital expenditures requirements, and the effect of renovations, including temporary closures, on our hotel occupancy and financial results; •the ability of our hotels to compete effectively against other lodging businesses in the highly competitive markets in which we operate in areas such as access, location, quality of accommodations and room rate structures; •our ability to acquire or develop additional hotels and the risk that potential acquisitions or developments may not perform in accordance with our expectations; •the ability to complete hotel renovations on schedule and on, or under, budget and the potential for increased costs and construction delays due to shortages of supplies as a result of supply chain disruptions;  •relationships with property managers and joint venture partners and our ability to realize the expected benefits of our joint ventures and other strategic relationships; •risks associated with a single manager, Marriott International, managing a significant percentage of our hotels; •changes in the desirability of the geographic regions of the hotels in our portfolio or in the travel patterns of hotel customers;•the ability of third-party internet and other travel intermediaries to attract and retain customers; •our ability to recover fully under our existing insurance policies for terrorist acts and natural disasters and our ability to maintain adequate or full replacement cost “all-risk” property insurance policies on our hotels on commercially reasonable terms; •the effect of a data breach or significant disruption of hotel operator information technology networks as a result of cyber- attacks; •the effects of tax legislative action and other changes in laws and regulations, or the interpretation thereof, including the need for compliance with new environmental and safety requirements; •the ability of Host Inc. and each of the REITs acquired, established or to be established by Host Inc. to continue to satisfy complex rules in order to qualify as REITs for U.S. federal income tax purposes and Host Inc.’s and Host L.P.’s ability and the ability of our subsidiaries, and similar entities to be acquired or established by us, to operate effectively within the limitations imposed by these rules; and•risks associated with our ability to execute our dividend policy, including factors such as investment activity, operating results and the economic outlook, any or all of which may influence the decision of our board of directors as to whether to pay future dividends at levels previously disclosed or to use available cash to pay special dividends. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. Achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and potentially inaccurate assumptions, including those risk factors discussed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 and in other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Although we believe that the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions, we can give no assurance that we will attain these expectations or that any deviations will not be material.
The following table reflects certain line items from our unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations and significant operating statistics (in millions, except per share and hotel statistics):
(1)EBITDAre, Adjusted EBITDAre, NAREIT FFO per diluted share and Adjusted FFO per diluted share and comparable hotel operating results (including hotel revenues and hotel EBITDA and margins) are non-GAAP financial measures within the meaning of the rules of the SEC. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and "Comparable Hotel Operating Statistics and Results" for more information on these measures, including why we believe these supplemental measures are useful, reconciliations to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, and the limitations on the use of these supplemental measures. Additionally, comparable hotel results and statistics are based on 75 comparable hotels as of March 31, 2023 and include adjustments for non-comparable hotels, dispositions and acquisitions. See Comparable Hotel RevPAR Overview for results of the portfolio based on our ownership period, without these adjustments.
Total revenues increased $307 million, or 28.6%, as compared to the first quarter of 2022, due to strong leisure demand at our resort hotels and the recovery of group travel at our convention hotels, although group and business transient room nights have not yet returned to pre-pandemic levels. Comparable hotel RevPAR and Total RevPAR for the first quarter increased 31.1% and 34.0%, respectively, compared to the first quarter of 2022 due to both rate and occupancy growth. The significant improvement was anticipated, as the Omicron variant of COVID-19 significantly impaired travel during January and the first part of February in 2022. In addition, resorts continued to show leisure strength, with an increase in comparable hotel RevPAR of 4.9% driven by occupancy. At the same time, the recovery at our city-center properties allowed for significant improvements at some of the markets lagging in 2022. Comparable hotel Total RevPAR for all markets exceeded first quarter 2022 levels. The recovery at our city-center properties led the portfolio, as comparable hotel Total RevPAR in our New York, Washington, D.C. and San Francisco/San Jose markets, some of our larger markets by room count, increased by 105.8%, 99.1% and 92.7%, respectively, as these hotels were slower to ramp up in 2022 following the lifting of many of the COVID-19 restrictions. Despite the outsized growth in San Francisco during the first quarter, it remains below 2019 levels. Hotels in Florida and Hawaii recovered from the pandemic quicker than many of our other markets in 2022; therefore, while we still saw Total RevPAR improvements in these markets year-over-year, the increases were less substantial. For example, comparable hotel RevPAR in our Miami market led the portfolio at $501.89; however, this market had the smallest increase in comparable hotel Total RevPAR compared to 2022 with a 5.2% increase. Our Maui/Oahu and Jacksonville markets also experienced smaller growth, with increases in comparable hotel Total RevPAR of 9.3% and 7.1%, respectively. Our first quarter 2023 results improved when compared to 2022 as follows:•Net income increased $173 million;•Diluted earnings per share increased $0.24; •Adjusted EBITDAre increased $138 million; and•Adjusted FFO per diluted share increased $0.16.For the first quarter of 2023, operating profit margin under GAAP was 18.0% and comparable hotel EBITDA margin was 32.5%, an improvement of 660 basis points and 220 basis points, respectively, benefiting from improvements in rates and occupancy, compared to first quarter of 2022. Margins also benefited from more favorable comparisons to the first quarter of 2022, when hotel operators were still ramping up operations, in addition to improvements in food and beverage profits due to strong group contribution, and continued elevated levels of attrition and cancelation fees.
We have continued to experience a significant improvement in revenues and earnings through the first quarter of 2023 and, to date, we have not experienced signs of a weakening in the overall lodging industry. However, current macroeconomic headwinds and concerns surrounding the potential for an economic slowdown have created a great deal of uncertainty surrounding operating results for the remainder of 2023. Further improvement in operations will be dependent on the broader macroeconomic environment, which will affect our ability to maintain high-rated business in our resort markets, as well as the continued improvement of group, business transient and international inbound travel. Accordingly, we believe that operations in specific markets and asset types will continue to be uneven.Blue Chip Economic Indicators consensus currently estimates an increase in real U.S. GDP of 1.2% for 2023, with slight declines in the second and third quarters, while business investment is anticipated to increase 1.4%. The Federal Reserve's current rate hiking monetary policy, aimed at combating persistently high inflation, geopolitical uncertainty, and the recent regional bank failures and liquidity concerns at other financial institutions have led to increased risks and elevated concerns surrounding a potential economic slowdown. The range of potential outcomes on the economy and the lodging industry specifically remains exceptionally wide, reflecting varying analyst assumptions surrounding the impact of higher interest rates, inflation, ongoing labor shortages in key industries, and geopolitical conflicts.Hotel supply growth is anticipated to remain below the long-term historical average in 2023. Supply chain challenges have resulted in project delays across the U.S., and recent regional banking stress may create construction financing challenges for future projects. We anticipate that the new project pipeline will remain suppressed until macroeconomic concerns abate. While the pandemic had an outsized impact on our industry, particularly in luxury and upper upscale hotels in top U.S. markets, where a majority of our hotels are located, leisure travel continues to outperform expectations due to pent-up demand, high personal savings and waning virus fears. We also have seen a significant acceleration in group and business transient demand, leading to improving trends in our city-center markets. Based on the trends noted and an improved outlook for the remainder of the year, we expect comparable hotel RevPAR growth for the full year 2023 will be between 7.5% and 10.5%. We note that performance in the first quarter of 2022 was negatively impacted by the Omicron variant, resulting in easier comparisons for the first quarter of 2023. We expect performance in the second half of the year will be heavily influenced by the overall macroeconomic environment. Additionally, margins are expected to decline in comparison to 2022 driven by closer to stable staffing levels, higher wages, insurance and utility expenses, lower attrition and cancelation fees, and occupancy below 2019 levels.As noted above, the current outlook for the lodging industry remains highly uncertain; therefore, there can be no assurances as to the continued recovery in lodging demand for any number of reasons, including, but not limited to, slower than anticipated return of group and business travel or deteriorating macroeconomic conditions.
Dispositions. During the first quarter, we sold The Camby, Autograph Collection for $110 million and recorded a gain on sale of $69 million. In connection with the sale, we provided seller financing of $72 million with up to an additional $12 million available for property improvement plan financing not to exceed a 65% loan to cost ratio.Capital Projects. During the first quarter of 2023, we spent approximately $51 million on return on investment ("ROI") capital projects, $65 million on renewal and replacement projects, and $30 million on hurricane restoration work. Significant projects completed during the quarter include guestrooms, public space and meeting space renovations at The Westin Georgetown, Washington D.C. and the final phase of guestroom renovations at Marriott Marquis San Diego Marina. In addition, we continued our restoration efforts following Hurricane Ian, for which we estimated the total property damage and remediation costs to be approximately $200 million to $220 million, of which approximately 40% relates to remediation costs. The Hyatt Regency Coconut Point is open to guests, and the final phase of reconstruction, the resort's waterpark, is on-track to reopen mid-June 2023. The Ritz-Carlton, Naples remains closed, and reopening of the guestrooms, suites and amenities, including the new tower expansion, is targeted for July 2023. We are nearing completion on the Marriott transformational capital program, which began in 2018. We believe this program will position these hotels to be more competitive in their respective markets and will enhance long-term performance through increases in RevPAR and market yield index. We agreed to invest amounts in excess of the furniture fixture and equipment ("FF&E") reserves required under our management agreements and, in exchange, Marriott has provided additional priority returns on the agreed upon investments and operating profit guarantees of $83 million, before reductions for incentive management fees, to offset expected business disruption. Approximately 98% of the total estimated costs of the program have been spent as of March 31, 2023. Of the 16 hotels included in the program, we have completed projects at the Coronado Island Marriott Resort & Spa, New York Marriott Downtown, San Francisco Marriott Marquis and Santa Clara Marriott in 2019; projects at the Minneapolis Marriott City Center, San Antonio Marriott Rivercenter and JW Marriott Atlanta Buckhead in 2020; projects at The Ritz-Carlton Amelia Island, New York Marriott Marquis and Orlando World Center Marriott in 2021; projects at Boston Marriott Copley Place, the Houston Marriott Medical Center, JW Marriott Houston by the Galleria, and Marina del Rey Marriott in 2022; and projects at the Marriott Marquis San Diego Marina in the first quarter of 2023. We expect the final hotel, Washington Marriott at Metro Center, to be completed in the second quarter of 2023.For full year 2023, we expect total capital expenditures of $600 million to $725 million, consisting of ROI projects of approximately $250 million to $300 million, renewal and replacement expenditures of $250 million to $300 million, and restoration work for the damage caused by Hurricane Ian of $100 million to $125 million. The ROI projects include approximately $25 million to $35 million for the Marriott transformational capital program discussed above.
The following table reflects certain line items from our unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations (in millions, except percentages):
(1)   Amount represents total operating costs and expenses from our unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations, less corporate and other expenses.
The following table presents total revenues in accordance with GAAP and includes all consolidated hotels (in millions, except percentages):
Operations have improved significantly in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 2022 due to the ongoing recovery of the lodging industry from the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact of the Omicron variant during the first quarter of 2022.  With operations  normalizing from the effects of the pandemic, results were also impacted by shifting business and market mix, as well as lost revenues due to the continued closure of The Ritz-Carlton, Naples caused by Hurricane Ian. In addition, the Four Seasons Resort and Residences Jackson Hole, which we acquired in November 2022, contributed $31 million to the growth in revenues in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the negative impact on revenues of $24 million resulting from 2022 and 2023 dispositions. Rooms. Total rooms revenues increased $165 million, or 25.2%, for the first quarter compared to 2022. Rooms revenues at our comparable hotels increased $191 million, or 31.1%, for the quarter. These increases were due to increases in both average room rates and occupancy. Food and beverage. Total food and beverage ("F&B") revenues increased $134 million, or 45.1%, for the quarter compared to 2022. Comparable hotel F&B revenues increased $144 million, or 52.2%, for the quarter. These increases were primarily due to strong group contribution with improvements in outlet, banquet and audio-visual revenues as convention hotels continued to recover from the pandemic.Other revenues. Total other revenues increased $8 million, or 6.6%, for the quarter compared to 2022. At our comparable hotels, other revenues increased $8 million, or 6.7%, for the quarter. These increases were primarily due to an increase in ancillary revenues, including strong golf and spa revenues, driven by improved occupancy levels.
The following table presents property-level operating expenses in accordance with GAAP and includes all consolidated hotels (in millions, except percentages):
Our operating costs and expenses, which consist of both fixed and variable components, are affected by several factors. Rooms expenses are affected mainly by occupancy, which drives costs related to items such as housekeeping, reservation systems, room supplies, laundry services and front desk costs. Food and beverage expenses correlate closely with food and beverage revenues and are affected by occupancy and the mix of business between banquet, audio-visual and outlet sales. However, the most significant expense for the rooms, food and beverage, and other departmental and support expenses is wages and employee benefits, which comprise approximately 56% of these expenses. During the first quarter of 2023, these expenses increased 33% compared to 2022, reflecting an increase in hiring as operations have recovered. In addition, early in 2022, hiring was temporarily paused in many areas due to the Omicron variant, as well as seasonality in certain markets. Hiring pace has since improved, and managers at the majority of our hotels now are operating at desired staffing levels. Wage and benefit rate inflation is expected to be approximately 5% in 2023.Other property-level expenses consist of property taxes, the amounts and structure of which are highly dependent on local jurisdiction taxing authorities, and property and general liability insurance, all of which do not necessarily increase or decrease based on similar changes in revenues at our hotels.The increase in expenses for the first quarter of 2023 compared to 2022 for rooms, food and beverage, other departmental and support, and management fees was generally due to the corresponding increase in revenues from improvements in occupancy and hotel operations, as follows:Rooms. Rooms expenses increased $33 million, or 20.6%, for the quarter. Our comparable hotels rooms expenses increased $44 million, or 30.1%, for the quarter. These increases reflect the increase in staffing described above.Food and beverage. F&B expenses increased $69 million, or 34.5%, for the quarter. For our comparable hotels, F&B expenses increased $79 million, or 43.2%. Overall, F&B costs as a percentage of revenues declined, benefiting from improved banquet revenues and ongoing productivity improvement.Other departmental and support expenses. Other departmental and support expenses increased $42 million, or 15.4%, for the quarter. On a comparable hotel basis, other departmental and support expenses increased $52 million, or 20.4%, for the quarter. These increases were primarily due to improved operations and an increase in staffing. Management fees. Base management fees, which generally are calculated as a percentage of total revenues, increased $8 million, or 26.7%, for the quarter. Incentive management fees, which generally are based on the amount of operating profit at each hotel after we receive a priority return on our investment, increased $17 million, or 170.0%, for the quarter. At our comparable hotels, base management fees increased $9 million, or 32.6%, and incentive management fees increased $15 million, or 109.9%, for the quarter. The increase in incentive management fees primarily reflects the improved operations at our properties.Other property-level expenses. These expenses generally do not vary significantly based on occupancy and include expenses such as property taxes and insurance. Other property level expenses increased $7 million, or 8.3%, for the quarter, due to increases in property insurance premiums and rent on a portion of our ground leases that are based on a percentage of sales. Other property-level expenses also were partially offset by the receipt of operating profit guarantees received from Marriott under the transformational capital program in both 2022 and 2023, with the last of the payments expected to be received in the second quarter of 2023. Other property-level expenses at our comparable hotels increased $11 million, or 13.5%, for the quarter.
Corporate and other expenses. The following table details our corporate and other expenses for the quarter (in millions):
Interest expense. Interest expense increased for the quarter due to an increase in interest rates on our floating rate debt. The following table details our interest expense for the quarter (in millions):
(1)Including the change in accrued interest, total cash interest paid was $40 million and $28 million for the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.Other gains. Other gains increased $56 million for the quarter, reflecting the sale of The Camby, Autograph Collection in the first quarter of 2023.Equity in earnings of affiliates. Equity in earnings of affiliates increased $5 million for the quarter to $7 million, consisting of earnings from our investment in the Noble Joint Venture, as well as improved operations at our non-consolidated properties.Benefit for income taxes. We lease substantially all our properties to consolidated subsidiaries designated as taxable REIT subsidiaries (“TRS”) for U.S. federal income tax purposes. Taxable income or loss generated/incurred by the TRS primarily represents hotel-level operations and the aggregate rent paid to Host L.P. by the TRS, on which we record an income tax provision or benefit. For the first quarter, we recorded an income tax benefit of $2 million, due primarily to the domestic net operating loss incurred by our TRS.
Effective January 1, 2023, we have ceased presentation of All Owned Hotel results, and returned to a comparable hotel presentation for our hotel level results. Comparable hotels are those properties that we have consolidated for the entirety of the reporting periods being compared. Comparable hotels do not include the results of hotels sold or classified as held-for-sale, hotels that have sustained substantial property damage or business interruption, or hotels that have undergone large-scale capital projects, in each case requiring closures lasting one month or longer during the reporting periods being compared. We believe this will provide investors with a better understanding of underlying growth trends for our current portfolio, without impact from properties that experienced closures. We have removed Hyatt Regency Coconut Point Resort and Spa and The Ritz-Carlton, Naples from our comparable operations for 2023 due to closures caused by Hurricane Ian. See “Comparable Hotel Operating Statistics and Results” below for more information on how we determine our comparable hotels.We also include, following the comparable hotels results, the same operating statistics presentation on an actual basis, which includes results for our portfolio for the time period of our ownership, including the results of non-comparable properties, dispositions through their date of disposal and acquisitions beginning as of the date of acquisition. Lastly, we discuss our Hotel RevPAR results by geographic location and mix of business (i.e., transient, group, or contract).
The following tables set forth performance information for our hotels by geographic location for the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, on a comparable hotel and actual basis:
(1)      Represents the results of the portfolio for the time period of our ownership, including the results of non-comparable properties, dispositions through their date of disposal and acquisitions beginning as of the date of acquisition.
Our customers fall into three broad categories: transient, group, and contract business, which accounted for approximately 65%, 32%, and 3%, respectively, of our full year 2022 room sales. The information below is derived from business mix data for the 75 comparable hotels as of March 31, 2023. For additional detail on our business mix, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10‑K.The following are the results of our transient, group and contract business:
Liquidity and Capital Resources of Host Inc. and Host L.P. The liquidity and capital resources of Host Inc. and Host L.P. are derived primarily from the activities of Host L.P., which generates the capital required by our business from hotel operations, the incurrence of debt, the issuance of OP units or the sale of hotels. Host Inc. is a REIT and its only significant asset is the ownership of general and limited partner interests of Host L.P.; therefore, its financing and investing activities are conducted through Host L.P., except for the issuance of its common and preferred stock. Proceeds from common and preferred stock issuances by Host Inc. are contributed to Host L.P. in exchange for common and preferred OP units. Additionally, funds used by Host Inc. to pay dividends or to repurchase its stock are provided by Host L.P. Therefore, while we have noted those areas in which it is important to distinguish between Host Inc. and Host L.P., we have not included a separate discussion of liquidity and capital resources as the discussion below applies to both Host Inc. and Host L.P. Overview. We look to maintain a capital structure and liquidity profile with an appropriate balance of cash, debt, and equity to provide financial flexibility given the inherent volatility of the lodging industry. We believe this strategy has resulted in a better cost of debt capital, allowing us to complete opportunistic investments and acquisitions and positioning us to manage potential declines in operations throughout the lodging cycle. We have structured our debt profile to maintain a balanced maturity schedule and to minimize the number of hotels that are encumbered by mortgage debt. Currently, only one of our consolidated hotels is encumbered by mortgage debt. Over the past several years leading up to the COVID-19 pandemic, we had decreased our leverage as measured by our net debt-to-EBITDA ratio and reduced our debt service obligations, leading to an increase in our fixed charge coverage ratio. As a result, we were well positioned at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic with sufficient liquidity and financial flexibility to withstand the severe slowdown in U.S. economic activity and lodging demand brought on by the pandemic. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to fund corporate expenses, capital expenditures and dividends and remain well positioned to execute additional investment transactions to the extent opportunities arise. Cash Requirements. We use cash for acquisitions, capital expenditures, debt payments, operating costs, and corporate and other expenses, as well as for dividends and distributions to stockholders and to OP unitholders, respectively, and stock and OP unit repurchases. We have no significant debt maturities until 2024. As a REIT, Host Inc. is required to distribute to its stockholders at least 90% of its taxable income, excluding net capital gain, on an annual basis. Capital Resources. As of March 31, 2023, we had $563 million of cash and cash equivalents, $203 million in our FF&E escrow reserves and $1.5 billion available under the revolver portion of our credit facility. We depend primarily on external sources of capital to finance future growth, including acquisitions. As a result, the liquidity and debt capacity provided by our credit facility and the ability to issue senior unsecured debt are key components of our capital structure. Our financial flexibility, including our ability to incur debt, pay dividends, make distributions and make investments, is contingent on our ability to maintain compliance with the financial covenants of our credit facility and senior notes indentures, which include, among other things, the allowable amounts of leverage, interest coverage and fixed charges. We currently have a program in place to repurchase Host Inc. common stock. During the first quarter of 2023, we repurchased 3.2 million shares at an average price of $15.65 per share, exclusive of commissions, through this program for a total of $50 million. The common stock may be purchased from time to time depending upon market conditions and may be purchased in the open market or through private transactions or by other means, including principal transactions with various financial institutions, like accelerated share repurchases, forwards, options, and similar transactions and through one or more trading plans designed to comply with Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. The plan does not obligate us to repurchase any specific number or any specific dollar amount of shares and may be suspended at any time at our discretion. At March 31, 2023, we had $923 million available for repurchase under our program. Given the total amount of our debt and our maturity schedule, we may continue to redeem or repurchase senior notes from time to time, taking advantage of favorable market conditions. In February 2023, Host Inc.’s Board of Directors authorized repurchases of up to $1.0 billion of senior notes other than in accordance with their respective terms, of which the entire amount remains available under this authority. We may purchase senior notes with cash through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, a tender offer, or, in some cases, through the early redemption of such securities pursuant to their terms. Repurchases of debt will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. Any retirement before the maturity date will affect earnings and NAREIT FFO per diluted share as a result of the payment of any applicable call premiums and the accelerated expensing of previously deferred and capitalized financing costs. Accordingly, considering our priorities in managing our capital structure and liquidity profile, and given prevailing conditions and relative pricing in the capital markets, we may, at any time, subject to applicable securities laws and the requirements of our credit facility and senior notes, be considering, or be in discussions with respect to, the repurchase or issuance of exchangeable debentures and/or senior notes or the repurchase or sale of our common stock. Any such transactions may, subject to applicable securities laws, occur simultaneously. We continue to explore potential acquisitions and dispositions. We anticipate that any such future acquisitions will be funded primarily by proceeds from sales of hotels, but also potentially from equity offerings of Host Inc., issuances of OP units by Host L.P., or available cash. Given the nature of these transactions, we can make no assurances that we will be successful in acquiring any one or more hotels that we may review, bid on or negotiate to purchase or that we will be successful in disposing of any one or more of our hotels. We may acquire additional hotels or dispose of hotels through various structures, including transactions involving single assets, portfolios, joint ventures, acquisitions of the securities or assets of other REITs or distributions of hotels to our stockholders.Sources and Uses of Cash. Our sources of cash generally include cash from operations, proceeds from debt and equity issuances, and proceeds from hotel sales. Uses of cash include acquisitions, capital expenditures, operating costs, debt repayments, and repurchases of shares and distributions to equity holders. Cash Provided by Operating Activities. In the first quarter of 2023, net cash provided by operating activities was $308 million compared to $261 million for 2022. The $47 million increase in 2023 was primarily driven by improved operations at our hotels compared to the first quarter of 2022. Cash Used in Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities was $105 million during the first quarter of 2023 compared to $92 million for 2022. Cash used in investing activities during the first quarter of 2023 primarily related to $146 million of capital expenditures and investment in our joint ventures. Cash used in investing activities during the first quarter of 2022 primarily related to $122 million of capital expenditures and an investment in a joint venture. Cash provided by investing activities in the first quarters of 2023 and 2022 each includes the sale of one hotel, with 2023 proceeds of $37 million related to the sale of The Camby, Autograph Collection, which is net of a $72 million loan issued to the buyer in connection with the sale. Cash Used in Financing Activities. In the first quarter of 2023, net cash used in financing activities was $308 million compared to $693 million for 2022. Cash used in financing activities in the first quarter of 2023 primarily related to the payment of common stock dividends and common stock repurchases. In the first quarter of 2022, cash used in financing activities included the repayment of the credit facility revolver.The following table summarizes significant equity transactions that have been completed through May 3, 2023 (in millions):
(1)In connection with the dividend payments, Host L.P. made distributions of $318 million to its common OP unit holders.(2)Includes the fourth quarter 2022 dividend that was paid in January 2023.
As of March 31, 2023, our total debt was $4.2 billion, with a weighted average interest rate of 4.5% and a weighted average maturity of 5 years. Additionally, 76% of our debt has a fixed rate of interest and only one of our consolidated hotels is encumbered by mortgage debt.
On January 4, 2023, we entered into the sixth amended and restated senior revolving credit and term loan facility, with Bank of America, N.A., as administrative agent, Wells Fargo Bank, N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as co-syndication agents, and certain other agents and lenders. The credit facility allows for revolving borrowings in an aggregate principal amount of up to $1.5 billion. The revolver also includes a foreign currency subfacility for Canadian dollars, Australian dollars, Euros, British pounds sterling and, if available to the lenders, Mexican pesos, of up to the foreign currency equivalent of $500 million, subject to a lower amount in the case of Mexican peso borrowings. The credit facility also provides for a term loan facility of $1 billion (which is fully utilized), a subfacility of up to $100 million for swingline borrowings in currencies other than U.S. dollars and a subfacility of up to $100 million for issuances of letters of credit. Host L.P. also has the option to add in the future $500 million of commitments which may be used for additional revolving credit facility borrowings and/or term loans, subject to obtaining additional loan commitments (which we have not currently obtained) and the satisfaction of certain conditions. The revolving credit facility has an initial scheduled maturity date of January 4, 2027, which date may be extended by up to a year, one $500 million term loan tranche has an initial maturity date of January 4, 2027, which date may be extended up to a year and the second $500 million term loan tranche has a maturity date of January 4, 2028, which date may not be extended. The exercise of any extension options is subject to certain various conditions, including the payment of an extension fee.  The new credit facility also converted the underlying reference rate from LIBOR to SOFR plus a credit spread adjustment of 10 basis points.Credit Facility Covenants. Our credit facility contains certain important financial covenants concerning allowable leverage, unsecured interest coverage, and required fixed charge coverage. Total debt used in the calculation of our ratio of consolidated total debt to consolidated EBITDA (our “Leverage Ratio”) is based on a “net debt” concept, pursuant to which cash and cash equivalents in excess of $100 million are deducted from our total debt balance for purposes of measuring compliance. At March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all of our financial covenants under the credit facility. The following table summarizes the results of the financial tests required by the credit facility, which are calculated on a trailing twelve-month basis:
(1)	If, at any time, our leverage ratio is above 7.0x, our minimum unsecured interest coverage ratio will decrease to 1.50x.
The following table summarizes the results of the financial tests required by the indentures for our senior notes and our actual credit ratios as of March 31, 2023:
For additional details on our credit facility and senior notes, including the terms of the Amendments, see our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Host Inc. is required to distribute at least 90% of its annual taxable income, excluding net capital gains, to its stockholders in order to maintain its qualification as a REIT. Funds used by Host Inc. to pay dividends on its common stock are provided by distributions from Host L.P. As of March 31, 2023, Host Inc. is the owner of approximately 99% of the Host L.P. common OP units. The remaining common OP units are owned by unaffiliated limited partners. Each Host L.P. common OP unit may be redeemed for cash or, at the election of Host Inc., Host Inc. common stock based on the conversion ratio. The conversion ratio is 1.021494 shares of Host Inc. common stock for each Host L.P. common OP unit. Investors should consider the non-controlling interests in the Host L.P. common OP units when analyzing dividend payments by Host Inc. to its stockholders, as these Host L.P. common OP unitholders share in cash distributed by Host L.P. to all of its common OP unitholders, on a pro rata basis. For example, if Host Inc. paid a $1 per share dividend on its common stock, it would be based on the payment of a $1.021494 per common OP unit distribution by Host L.P. to Host Inc., as well as to the other unaffiliated Host L.P. common OP unitholders. Host Inc.’s policy on common dividends generally is to distribute, over time, 100% of its taxable income, which primarily is dependent on Host Inc.’s results of operations, as well as tax gains and losses on hotel sales. On February 15, 2023, Host Inc.'s Board of Directors announced a regular quarterly cash dividend of $0.12 per share on Host Inc.'s common stock. The dividend was paid on April 17, 2023 to stockholders as of record on March 31, 2023. All future dividends are subject to Board approval.
Our unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. While we do not believe that the reported amounts would be materially different, application of these policies involves the exercise of judgment and the use of assumptions as to future uncertainties and, as a result, actual results could differ from these estimates. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. All of our significant accounting policies, including certain critical accounting policies, are disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Effective January 1, 2023, the Company ceased presentation of All Owned Hotel results and returned to a comparable hotel presentation for its hotel level results. Management believes this provides investors with a better understanding of underlying growth trends for our current portfolio, without impact from properties that experienced closures due to renovations or property damage sustained. To facilitate a year-to-year comparison of our operations, we present certain operating statistics (i.e., Total RevPAR, RevPAR, average daily rate and average occupancy) and operating results (revenues, expenses, hotel EBITDA and associated margins) for the periods included in our reports on a comparable hotel basis in order to enable our investors to better evaluate our operating performance. We define our comparable hotels as those that: (i) are owned or leased by us as of the reporting date and are not classified as held-for-sale; and (ii) have not sustained substantial property damage or business interruption, or undergone large-scale capital projects, in each case requiring closures lasting one month or longer (as further defined below), during the reporting periods being compared.We make adjustments to include recent acquisitions to include results for periods prior to our ownership. For these hotels, since the year-over-year comparison includes periods prior to our ownership, the changes will not necessarily correspond to changes in our actual results. Additionally, operating results of hotels that we sell are excluded from the comparable hotel set once the transaction has closed or the hotel is classified as held-for-sale. The hotel business is capital-intensive and renovations are a regular part of the business. Generally, hotels under renovation remain comparable hotels. A large-scale capital project would cause a hotel to be excluded from our comparable hotel set if it requires the entire property to be closed to hotel guests for one month or longer.Similarly, hotels are excluded from our comparable hotel set from the date that they sustain substantial property damage or business interruption if it requires the property to be closed to hotel guests for one month or longer. In each case, these hotels are returned to the comparable hotel set when the operations of the hotel have been included in our consolidated results for one full calendar year after the hotel has reopened. Often, related to events that cause property damage and the closure of a hotel, we will collect business interruption insurance proceeds for the near-term loss of business. These proceeds are included in gain on property insurance and business interruption settlements on our consolidated statements of operations. Business interruption insurance gains related to a hotel that was excluded from our comparable hotel set also will be excluded from the comparable hotel results.Of the 77 hotels that we owned as of March 31, 2023, 75 have been classified as comparable hotels. The operating results of the following hotels that we owned as of March 31, 2023 are excluded from comparable hotel results for these periods, due to closure of the property:•Hyatt Regency Coconut Point Resort & Spa (business disruption due to Hurricane Ian beginning in September 2022, closed until November 2022); and•The Ritz-Carlton, Naples (business disruption due to Hurricane Ian beginning in September 2022, remains closed).
Operating results denominated in foreign currencies are translated using the prevailing exchange rates on the date of the transaction, or monthly based on the weighted average exchange rate for the period. Therefore, hotel statistics and results for non-U.S. properties include the effect of currency fluctuations, consistent with our financial statement presentation.
We use certain “non-GAAP financial measures,” which are measures of our historical or future financial performance that are not calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, within the meaning of applicable SEC rules. These measures include the following: •Earnings Before Interest Expense, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (“EBITDA”), Earnings Before Interest Expense, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization for real estate (“EBITDAre”) and Adjusted EBITDAre, as a measure of performance for Host Inc. and Host L.P., •Funds From Operations (“FFO”) and FFO per diluted share, both calculated in accordance with National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts (“NAREIT”) guidelines and with certain adjustments from those guidelines, as a measure of performance for Host Inc., and•Comparable hotel operating results, as a measure of performance for Host Inc. and Host L.P.The discussion below defines these measures and presents why we believe they are useful supplemental measures of our performance. Set forth below for each such non-GAAP financial measure is a reconciliation of the measure with the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP that we consider most directly comparable thereto. We also have included in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations – Non-GAAP Financial Measures” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 further explanations of the adjustments being made, a statement disclosing the reasons why we believe the presentation of each of the non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to investors regarding our financial condition and results of operations, the additional purposes for which we use the non-GAAP financial measures and limitations on their use.
EBITDA is a commonly used measure of performance in many industries. Management believes EBITDA provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations because it helps us and our investors evaluate the ongoing operating performance of our properties after removing the impact of our capital structure (primarily interest expense) and our asset base (primarily depreciation and amortization). Management also believes the use of EBITDA facilitates comparisons between us and other lodging REITs, hotel owners who are not REITs and other capital-intensive companies. Management uses EBITDA to evaluate property-level results and as one measure in determining the value of acquisitions and dispositions and, like FFO and Adjusted FFO per diluted share, it is widely used by management in the annual budget process and for compensation programs.
We present EBITDAre in accordance with NAREIT guidelines, as defined in its September 2017 white paper “Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization for Real Estate,” to provide an additional performance measure to facilitate the evaluation and comparison of our results with other REITs. NAREIT defines EBITDAre as net income (calculated in accordance with GAAP) excluding interest expense, income tax, depreciation and amortization, gains or losses on disposition of depreciated property (including gains or losses on change of control), impairment expense for depreciated property and of investments in unconsolidated affiliates caused by a decrease in value of depreciated property in the affiliate, and adjustments to reflect the entity’s pro rata share of EBITDAre of unconsolidated affiliates. We make additional adjustments to EBITDAre when evaluating our performance because we believe that the exclusion of certain additional items described below provides useful supplemental information to investors regarding our ongoing operating performance. We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITDAre, when combined with the primary GAAP presentation of net income, is beneficial to an investor’s understanding of our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDAre also is similar to what is used in calculating certain credit ratios for our credit facility and senior notes. We adjust EBITDAre for the following items, which may occur in any period, and refer to this measure as Adjusted EBITDAre: •Property Insurance Gains – We exclude the effect of property insurance gains reflected in our condensed consolidated statements of operations because we believe that including them in Adjusted EBITDAre is not consistent with reflecting the ongoing performance of our assets. In addition, property insurance gains could be less important to investors given that the depreciated asset book value written off in connection with the calculation of the property insurance gain often does not reflect the market value of real estate assets.  •Acquisition Costs – Under GAAP, costs associated with completed property acquisitions that are considered business combinations are expensed in the year incurred. We exclude the effect of these costs because we believe they are not reflective of the ongoing performance of the Company. •Litigation Gains and Losses – We exclude the effect of gains or losses associated with litigation recorded under GAAP that we consider outside the ordinary course of business. We believe that including these items is not consistent with our ongoing operating performance.•Severance Expense – In certain circumstances, we will add back hotel-level severance expenses when we do not believe that such expenses are reflective of the ongoing operation of our properties. Situations that would result in a severance add-back include, but are not limited to: (i) costs incurred as part of a broad-based reconfiguration of the operating model with the specific hotel operator for a portfolio of hotels and (ii) costs incurred at a specific hotel due to a broad-based and significant reconfiguration of a hotel and/or its workforce. We do not add back corporate-level severance costs or severance costs at an individual hotel that we consider to be incurred in the normal course of business.In unusual circumstances, we also may adjust EBITDAre for gains or losses that management believes are not representative of the Company’s current operating performance. The last adjustment of this nature was a 2013 exclusion of a gain from an eminent domain claim. The following table provides a reconciliation of EBITDA, EBITDAre, and Adjusted EBITDAre to net income, the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP that we consider the most directly comparable:
(1)    Reflects the sale of one hotel in each of the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.(2)    Unrealized gains of our unconsolidated investments are not recognized in our EBITDAre, Adjusted EBITDAre, NAREIT FFO or Adjusted FFO until they have been realized by the unconsolidated partnership.
We present NAREIT FFO and NAREIT FFO per diluted share as non-GAAP measures of our performance in addition to our earnings per share (calculated in accordance with GAAP). We calculate NAREIT FFO per diluted share as our NAREIT FFO (defined as set forth below) for a given operating period, as adjusted for the effect of dilutive securities, divided by the number of fully diluted shares outstanding during such period, in accordance with NAREIT guidelines. Effective January 1, 2019, we adopted NAREIT’s definition of FFO included in NAREIT’s Funds From Operations White Paper – 2018 Restatement. NAREIT defines FFO as net income (calculated in accordance with GAAP) excluding depreciation and amortization related to certain real estate assets, gains and losses from the sale of certain real estate assets, gains and losses from change in control, impairment expense of certain real estate assets and investments and adjustments for consolidated partially-owned entities and unconsolidated affiliates. Adjustments for consolidated partially-owned entities and unconsolidated affiliates are calculated to reflect our pro rata share of the FFO of those entities on the same basis.We also present Adjusted FFO per diluted share when evaluating our performance because management believes that the exclusion of certain additional items described below provides useful supplemental information to investors regarding our ongoing operating performance. Management historically has made the adjustments detailed below in evaluating our performance, in our annual budget process and for our compensation programs. We believe that the presentation of Adjusted FFO per diluted share, when combined with both the primary GAAP presentation of diluted earnings per share and FFO per diluted share as defined by NAREIT, provides useful supplemental information that is beneficial to an investor’s understanding of our operating performance. We adjust NAREIT FFO per diluted share for the following items, which may occur in any period, and refer to this measure as Adjusted FFO per diluted share: •Gains and Losses on the Extinguishment of Debt – We exclude the effect of finance charges and premiums associated with the extinguishment of debt, including the acceleration of the write-off of deferred financing costs from the original issuance of the debt being redeemed or retired and incremental interest expense incurred during the refinancing period. We also exclude the gains on debt repurchases and the original issuance costs associated with the retirement of preferred stock. We believe that these items are not reflective of our ongoing finance costs. •Acquisition Costs – Under GAAP, costs associated with completed property acquisitions that are considered business combinations are expensed in the year incurred. We exclude the effect of these costs because we believe they are not reflective of the ongoing performance of the Company. •Litigation Gains and Losses – We exclude the effect of gains or losses associated with litigation recorded under GAAP that we consider outside the ordinary course of business. We believe that including these items is not consistent with our ongoing operating performance. •Severance Expense – In certain circumstances, we will add back hotel-level severance expenses when we do not believe that such expenses are reflective of the ongoing operation of our properties. Situations that would result in a severance add-back include, but are not limited to, (i) costs incurred as part of a broad-based reconfiguration of the operating model with the specific hotel operator for a portfolio of hotels and (ii) costs incurred at a specific hotel due to a broad-based and significant reconfiguration of a hotel and/or its workforce. We do not add back corporate-level severance costs or severance costs at an individual hotel that we consider to be incurred in the normal course of business.In unusual circumstances, we also may adjust NAREIT FFO for gains or losses that management believes are not representative of our current operating performance. For example, in 2017, as a result of the reduction of the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, we remeasured our domestic deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2017 and recorded a one-time adjustment to reduce our deferred tax assets and to increase the provision for income taxes by approximately $11 million. We do not consider this adjustment to be reflective of our on-going operating performance and, therefore, we excluded this item from Adjusted FFO.The following table provides a reconciliation of the differences between our non-GAAP financial measures, NAREIT FFO and Adjusted FFO (separately and on a per diluted share basis), and net income, the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP that we consider most directly comparable:
(1-2)   Refer to the corresponding footnote on the Reconciliation of Net Income to EBITDA, EBITDAre and Adjusted EBITDAre for Host Inc. and Host L.P. (3)      Diluted earnings (loss) per common share, NAREIT FFO per diluted share and Adjusted FFO per diluted share are adjusted for the effects of dilutive securities. Dilutive securities may include shares granted under comprehensive stock plans, preferred OP units held by minority partners and other non-controlling interests that have the option to convert their limited partner interests to common OP units. No effect is shown for securities if they are anti-dilutive.
We present certain operating results for our hotels, such as hotel revenues, expenses, food and beverage profit, and EBITDA (and the related margins), on a comparable hotel, or "same store," basis as supplemental information for our investors. Our comparable hotel results present operating results for our hotels without giving effect to dispositions or properties that experienced closures due to renovations or property damage, as discussed in “Comparable Hotel Operating Statistics and Results” above. We present comparable hotel EBITDA to help us and our investors evaluate the ongoing operating performance of our comparable hotels after removing the impact of our capital structure (primarily interest expense) and our asset base (primarily depreciation and amortization expense). Corporate-level costs and expenses also are removed to arrive at property-level results. We believe these property-level results provide investors with supplemental information about the ongoing operating performance of our comparable hotels. Comparable hotel results are presented both by location and for our properties in the aggregate. We eliminate from our comparable hotel level operating results severance costs related to broad-based and significant property-level reconfiguration that is not considered to be within the normal course of business, as we believe this elimination provides useful supplemental information that is beneficial to an investor’s understanding of our ongoing operating performance. We also eliminate depreciation and amortization expense because, even though depreciation and amortization expense are property-level expenses, these non-cash expenses, which are based on historical cost accounting for real estate assets, implicitly assume that the value of real estate assets diminishes predictably over time. As noted earlier, because real estate values historically have risen or fallen with market conditions, many real estate industry investors have considered presentation of historical cost accounting for operating results to be insufficient. Because of the elimination of corporate-level costs and expenses, gains or losses on disposition, certain severance expenses and depreciation and amortization expense, the comparable hotel operating results we present do not represent our total revenues, expenses, operating profit or net income and should not be used to evaluate our performance as a whole. Management compensates for these limitations by separately considering the impact of these excluded items to the extent they are material to operating decisions or assessments of our operating performance. Our consolidated statements of operations include such amounts, all of which should be considered by investors when evaluating our performance.We present these hotel operating results on a comparable hotel basis because we believe that doing so provides investors and management with useful information for evaluating the period-to-period performance of our hotels and facilitates comparisons with other hotel REITs and hotel owners. In particular, these measures assist management and investors in distinguishing whether increases or decreases in revenues and/or expenses are due to growth or decline of operations at comparable hotels (which represent the vast majority of our portfolio) or from other factors. While management believes that presentation of comparable hotel results is a supplemental measure that provides useful information in evaluating our ongoing performance, this measure is not used to allocate resources or to assess the operating performance of each of our hotels, as these decisions are based on data for individual hotels and are not based on comparable hotel results in the aggregate. For these reasons, we believe comparable hotel operating results, when combined with the presentation of GAAP operating profit, revenues and expenses, provide useful information to investors and management. The following tables present certain operating results and statistics for our hotels for the periods presented herein and a reconciliation of the differences between comparable Hotel EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, and net income, the financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP that we consider most directly comparable. Similar reconciliations of the differences between (i) hotel revenues and (ii) our revenues as calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP (each of which is used in the applicable margin calculation), and between (iii) hotel expenses and (iv) operating costs and expenses as calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, also are included in the reconciliation:
(1)   Profit margins are calculated by dividing the applicable operating profit by the related revenue amount. GAAP profit margins are calculated using amounts presented in the unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations. Comparable hotel margins are calculated using amounts presented in the following tables, which include reconciliations to the applicable GAAP results:
(2)     Property transaction adjustments represent the following items: (i) the elimination of results of operations of hotels sold or held-for-sale as of March 31, 2023,  which operations are included in our unaudited condensed consolidated statements of operations as continuing operations, and (ii) the addition of results for periods prior to our ownership for hotels acquired as of March 31, 2023. (3)    Non-comparable hotel results, net, includes the following items: (i) the results of operations of our non-comparable hotels, which operations are included in our consolidated statements of operations as continuing operations, and (ii) gains on business interruption proceeds relating to events that occurred while the hotels were classified as non-comparable.