
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand our results of operations and financial condition. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part I, Item 1 (Financial Statements and Supplementary Data) of this Form 10-Q.
Howmet is a global leader in lightweight metals engineering and manufacturing. Howmet’s innovative, multi-material products, which include nickel, titanium, aluminum, and cobalt, are used worldwide in the aerospace (commercial and defense), commercial transportation, and industrial and other markets.In the first quarter of 2023, the Company derived approximately 47% of its revenue from products sold to the commercial aerospace market which is substantially less than the pre-pandemic 2019 annual rate of approximately 60%. During the global COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the commercial aerospace industry to date, there was a decrease in domestic and international air travel, which in turn adversely affected demand for narrow body and wide body aircraft. Domestic air travel has rebounded and approximates pre-pandemic levels. International air travel continues to recover and is approximately 80% of pre-pandemic levels. We expect commercial aerospace growth to continue with narrow body demand returning faster than wide body demand. The commercial wide body aircraft market is taking longer to recover, which is creating a shift in our product mix compared to pre-pandemic conditions. In addition to the impact from the pandemic, the timing and level of future aircraft builds by original equipment manufacturers (“OEM”) are subject to changes and uncertainties, which may cause our future results to differ from prior periods due to changes in product mix in certain segments.For additional information regarding the ongoing risks related to our business, see section Part I, Item 1A in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Sales. Sales were $1,603 in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $1,324 in the first quarter of 2022. The increase of $279, or 21%, in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to higher aerospace sales including $168, or 29%, from the commercial aerospace market and $25, or 11%, from the defense aerospace market, an increase in inflationary cost pass through of approximately $35, and favorable product pricing of $17. Product price increases are in excess of inflationary cost pass through to our customers.Cost of goods sold (“COGS”). COGS as a percentage of Sales was 72.6% in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 71.8% in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to inflationary cost pass through and increased headcount, primarily in the Engine Products and Fastening Systems segments, in anticipation of future revenue increases, partially offset by higher volumes and favorable product pricing. Additionally, the Company recorded total COGS charges of $4 in the first quarter of 2023 related to fires that occurred at a Fastening Systems plant in France in 2019 (the “France Plant Fire”) and a mechanical failure resulting in substantial heat and fire-related damage to equipment at the Company’s cast house in Barberton, Ohio in the third quarter of 2022 (the “Barberton Cast House Incident”), compared to total COGS charges of $5 related to the France Plant Fire and a fire that occurred at a Forged Wheels plant in Barberton, Ohio in mid-February 2020 (the “Barberton Plant Fire”) in the first quarter of 2022. The Company has submitted insurance claims related to these plant fires. During the fourth quarter of 2022, the Company settled the insurance claim related to the Barberton Plant Fire. The Company anticipates additional charges of approximately $1 to $5 in the second quarter of 2023, with further impacts in subsequent quarters as the businesses continue to recover from the fires.Selling, general administrative, and other expenses (“SG&A”). SG&A expenses were $75 in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $69 in the first quarter of 2022. The increase of $6, or 9%, in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to higher employment and lease costs.Research and development expenses (“R&D”). R&D expenses were $9 in the first quarter of 2023 and $7 in the first quarter of 2022, an increase of $2, or 29%. The increase in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to higher spending on technology projects intended to support the aerospace business.Restructuring and other charges. Restructuring and other charges were $1 in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $2 in the first quarter of 2022 or a decrease of $1. Restructuring and other charges for the first quarter of 2023 were primarily due to exit related costs, including accelerated depreciation, of $2, partially offset by a reversal of $1 for a layoff reserve related to a prior period. Restructuring and other charges for the first quarter of 2022 were primarily due to exit related costs of $2.See Note D to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item I of this Form 10-Q for additional detail.Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net was $57 in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $58 in the first quarter of 2022. The decrease of $1 in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to a reduced average level of long-term debt. As a result of the reduction in the outstanding aggregate principal amount of the 5.125% Notes due October 2024 (the “5.125% Notes”), Interest expense, net is expected to be reduced annually by $9.See Note N to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item I of this Form 10-Q for additional detail related to the Company’s debt.Loss on debt redemption. Debt redemption or tender premiums include the cost to redeem or repurchase certain of the Company’s notes at a price which may be equal to the greater of the principal amount or the sum of the present values of the remaining scheduled payments, discounted using a defined treasury rate plus a spread, or a price based on the market price of its notes. Loss on debt redemption was $1 in the first quarter of 2023 compared to zero in the first quarter of 2022. The increase of $1 in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to the debt premiums paid on the early partial redemption of the 5.125% Notes in the first quarter of 2023. See Note N to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item I of this Form 10-Q for additional detail related to the Company’s debt.Other expense, net. Other expense, net was $7 in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $1 in the first quarter of 2022. The increase of $6 in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to the impacts of deferred compensation arrangements of $6 and higher non-service related net periodic benefit costs related to pension and other postretirement benefit plans of $3, partially offset by higher interest income of $5. Non-service related net periodic benefit costs related to defined benefit plans is expected to increase by approximately $20 for the full year 2023 versus 2022.Provision for income taxes. The estimated annual effective tax rate, before discrete items, applied to ordinary income was 23.4% in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 24.3% in the first quarter of 2022. The tax rate including discrete items was 32.7% in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 23.4% in the first quarter of 2022. A discrete net tax charge of $21, which includes the income tax reserve recorded as a result of the French tax litigation (See Note P to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item I of this Form 10-Q for additional detail), was recorded in the first quarter of 2023 compared to a discrete net tax benefit of $2 in the first quarter of 2022. The estimated annual effective tax rate has decreased primarily due to increased domestic deductions, lower non-deductible expenses, and a decrease in apportioned state tax rates, partially offset by increased earnings in high rate jurisdictions and decreased earnings in low rate jurisdictions. See Note G to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item I of this Form 10-Q for additional detail.Net income. Net income was $148, or $0.35 per diluted share, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $131, or $0.31 per diluted share, in the first quarter of 2022. The increase of $17 in the first quarter of 2023 was primarily due to higher sales in the commercial aerospace and defense aerospace markets as well as favorable product pricing, partially offset by an increase in Provision for income taxes and Other expense, net.
The Company’s operations consist of four worldwide reportable segments: Engine Products, Fastening Systems, Engineered Structures, and Forged Wheels. Segment performance under Howmet’s management reporting system is evaluated based on a number of factors; however, the primary measure of performance is Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Howmet’s definition of Segment Adjusted EBITDA (Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) is net margin plus an add-back for depreciation and amortization. Net margin is equivalent to Sales minus the following items: Cost of goods sold; Selling, general administrative, and other expenses; Research and development expenses; and Provision for depreciation and amortization. Special items, including Restructuring and other charges, are excluded from net margin and Segment Adjusted EBITDA. Segment Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Differences between the total segment and consolidated totals are in Corporate (See Note C to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for a description of each segment).The Company has aligned its operations consistent with how the Chief Executive Officer assesses operating performance and allocates capital.
Third-party sales for the Engine Products segment increased $164, or 26%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the commercial aerospace, defense aerospace, industrial gas turbine, and oil and gas markets.Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the Engine Products segment increased $39, or 23%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the commercial aerospace, defense aerospace, industrial gas turbine, and oil and gas markets. The segment added approximately 260 net headcount in the first quarter in anticipation of future revenue increases.Segment Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the Engine Products segment decreased approximately 70 basis points in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to an increase in inflationary costs and headcount, partially offset by higher volumes in the commercial aerospace, defense aerospace, industrial gas turbine, and oil and gas markets.The collective bargaining agreement between Howmet and the United Autoworkers at our Whitehall, Michigan location expired on March 31, 2023. The Whitehall, Michigan location has been preparing for the expiration of this collective bargaining agreement over the course of several months, and the contract has been extended by mutual agreement while negotiations continue.In 2023, as compared to 2022, demand in the commercial aerospace, defense aerospace, industrial gas turbine, and oil and gas markets is expected to increase.
Third-party sales for the Fastening Systems segment increased $48, or 18%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the narrow body commercial aerospace and defense aerospace markets.Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the Fastening Systems segment increased $2, or 4%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the narrow body commercial aerospace and defense aerospace markets, partially offset by inflationary costs. The segment added approximately 215 net headcount in the first quarter in anticipation of future revenue increases.Segment Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the Fastening Systems segment decreased approximately 260 basis points in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to an increase in inflationary costs and headcount, partially offset by higher volumes in the narrow body commercial aerospace and defense aerospace markets.In 2023, as compared to 2022, demand in the commercial aerospace and industrial markets are expected to increase.
Third-party sales for the Engineered Structures segment increased $25, or 14%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the commercial aerospace market, partially offset by lower volumes in the defense aerospace market.Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the Engineered Structures segment increased $7, or 30%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the commercial aerospace market, partially offset by lower volumes in the defense aerospace market.Segment Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the Engineered Structures segment increased approximately 190 basis points in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the commercial aerospace market, partially offset by lower volumes in the defense aerospace market.In 2023, as compared to 2022, demand in the commercial aerospace market is expected to increase. However, demand in the defense aerospace market is expected to be down.
Third-party sales for the Forged Wheels segment increased $42, or 17%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes in the commercial transportation market.Segment Adjusted EBITDA for the Forged Wheels segment increased $12, or 18%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes, partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency movements.Segment Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the Forged Wheels segment increased approximately 20 basis points in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher volumes and a decline in metal price pass through, partially offset by inflationary cost pass through and unfavorable foreign currency impacts.For the full year of 2023, as compared to 2022, demand in the commercial transportation markets served by Forged Wheels is expected to decrease in most regions due to lower OEM builds. A decrease in metal costs partially offset by an increase in other inflationary costs is expected to contribute to a net decrease in sales as the Company generally passes through these costs.
Total Segment Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. Management believes that this measure is meaningful to investors because it provides additional information with respect to the Company’s operating performance and the Company’s ability to meet its financial obligations. Differences between the total segment and consolidated totals are in Corporate. See Restructuring and other charges, Interest expense, net, Loss on debt redemption, and Other expense, net discussions above, under “Results of Operations” for reference.Corporate expense increased $7, or 32%, in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher nonrecurring legal and other advisory reimbursements received in 2022 compared to 2023 of $3, 2023 costs of $1 associated with closures, shutdowns, and other items which did not occur in 2022, and higher employment and lease costs in 2023, partially offset by lower costs related to the France Plant Fire, the Barberton Plant Fire, and the Barberton Cast House Incident of $1.
See the Environmental Matters section of Note P to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q.
See Note Q to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for subsequent events.
Cash provided from operations was $23 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to $55 in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease of $32, or 58%, was primarily due to higher working capital of $55, partially offset by higher operating results of $13 and lower payments on noncurrent liabilities of $5. The components of the change in working capital primarily included unfavorable changes in accounts payable of $135 and receivables of $14, partially offset by inventories of $42, accrued expenses of $35, taxes, including income taxes, of $10, and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $7.Management expects Howmet’s estimated pension contributions and other postretirement benefit payments in 2023 to be approximately $56.
Cash used for financing activities was $214 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to $194 in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase of $20, or 10%, was primarily due to payments made in connection with the reduction of long-term debt of $176 (See Note N to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for reference) and increased dividends paid to common stock shareholders of $8, partially offset by a reduction in common stock repurchases of $150. As a result of the reduction in the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 5.125% Notes, Interest expense, net is expected to be reduced annually by $9.The Company maintains a credit facility pursuant to its Five-Year Revolving Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with a syndicate of lenders and issuers named therein (See Note N to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for reference). As a result of the end of the covenant relief period on December 31, 2022, there is no longer a restriction on common stock dividends and share repurchases under the Credit Agreement.The Company may opportunistically issue new debt securities in accordance with securities laws, including, but not limited to, in order to refinance existing indebtedness.The Company may, in the future from time to time, redeem portions of its debt securities or repurchase portions of its debt or equity securities, in either the open market or through privately negotiated transactions, in accordance with applicable SEC and other legal requirements. The timing, prices, and sizes of purchases depend upon prevailing trading prices, general economic and market conditions, and other factors, including applicable securities laws. Such purchases may be completed by means of trading plans established from time to time in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, block trades, private transactions, open market repurchases, tender offers, and/or accelerated share repurchase agreements or other derivative transactions. The Company’s costs of borrowing and ability to access the capital markets are affected not only by market conditions but also by the short-term and long-term debt ratings assigned to the Company by the major credit rating agencies.
The Company’s credit ratings from the three major credit rating agencies are as follows:
On April 27, 2023, Moody’s affirmed the following ratings for Howmet: long-term debt at Ba1 and the current outlook as stable.On April 25, 2023, S&P affirmed Howmet’s long-term debt rating at BB+ and upgraded the current outlook from stable to positive, citing strong demand in the commercial aerospace market and the Company’s improved financial leverage.
Cash used for investing activities was $64 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to $61 in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase of $3 was primarily due to an increase in capital expenditures of $2.
See Note B to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q.
This report contains (and oral communications made by Howmet Aerospace may contain) statements that relate to future events and expectations and as such constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include those containing such words as “anticipates,” “believes,” “could,” “estimates,” “expects,” “forecasts,” “goal,” “guidance,” “intends,” “may,” “outlook,” “plans,” “projects,” “seeks,” “sees,” “should,” “targets,” “will,” “would,” or other words of similar meaning. All statements that reflect Howmet Aerospace’s expectations, assumptions or projections about the future, other than statements of historical fact, are forward-looking statements, including, without limitation, statements, forecasts and outlook relating to the condition of end markets; future financial results or operating performance; future strategic actions; Howmet Aerospace’s strategies, outlook, and business and financial prospects; and any future debt redemptions or repurchases of its debt or equity securities. These statements reflect beliefs and assumptions that are based on Howmet Aerospace’s perception of historical trends, current conditions and expected future developments, as well as other factors Howmet Aerospace believes are appropriate in the circumstances. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties, and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated by these statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: (a) deterioration in global economic and financial market conditions generally; (b) unfavorable changes in the markets served by Howmet Aerospace; (c) the impact of potential cyber attacks and information technology or data security breaches; (d) the loss of significant customers or adverse changes in customers’ business or financial conditions; (e) manufacturing difficulties or other issues that impact product performance, quality or safety; (f) inability of suppliers to meet obligations due to supply chain disruptions or otherwise; (g) failure to attract and retain a qualified workforce and key personnel; (h) uncertainty of the duration, extent and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on Howmet Aerospace’s business, results of operations, and financial condition; (i) the inability to achieve revenue growth, cash generation, restructuring plans, cost reductions, improvement in profitability, or strengthening of competitiveness and operations anticipated or targeted; (j) inability to meet increased demand, production targets or commitments; (k) competition from new product offerings, disruptive technologies or other developments; (l) geopolitical, economic, and regulatory risks relating to Howmet Aerospace’s global operations, including geopolitical and diplomatic tensions, instabilities and conflicts, as well as compliance with U.S. and foreign trade and tax laws, sanctions, embargoes and other regulations; (m) the outcome of contingencies, including legal proceedings, government or regulatory investigations, and environmental remediation, which can expose Howmet Aerospace to substantial costs and liabilities; (n) failure to comply with government contracting regulations; (o) adverse changes in discount rates or investment returns on pension assets; and (p) the other risk factors summarized in Howmet Aerospace’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 and other reports filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. Market projections are subject to the risks discussed above and other risks in the market. The statements in this report are made as of the date of the filing of this report. Howmet Aerospace disclaims any intention or obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether in response to new information, future events, or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.