
Our business is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties that could affect our ability to successfully implement our business strategy and affect our financial results. You should carefully consider all of the information in this report and, in particular, the following principal risks and all of the other specific factors described in Item 1A. of this report, “Risk Factors,” before deciding whether to invest in our company.•We depend heavily on JAKAFI/JAKAVI (ruxolitinib), and if we are not able to maintain revenues from JAKAFI/JAKAVI or those revenues decrease, our business may be materially harmed.•If we or our collaborators are unable to obtain, or maintain at anticipated levels, coverage and reimbursement for our products from government and other third-party payors, our results of operations and financial condition could be harmed.•A limited number of specialty pharmacies and wholesalers represent a significant portion of revenues from JAKAFI and most of our other products, and the loss of, or significant reduction in sales to, any one of these specialty pharmacies or wholesalers could harm our operations and financial condition.•If we are unable to establish and maintain effective sales, marketing and distribution capabilities, or to enter into agreements with third parties to do so, we will not be able to successfully commercialize our products.•If we fail to comply with applicable laws and regulations, we could lose our approval to market our products or be subject to other governmental enforcement activity.•If the use of our products harms or is perceived to harm patients, our regulatory approvals could be revoked or otherwise negatively impacted or we could be subject to costly product liability claims.•If we market our products in a manner that violates various laws and regulations, we may be subject to civil or criminal penalties.•Competition for our products could harm our business and result in a decrease in our revenue.•The COVID-19 pandemic and measures to address the pandemic, as well as other geopolitical events, have adversely affected and could in the future adversely affect our business and results of operations.•We or our collaborators may be unsuccessful in discovering and developing drug candidates, and we may spend significant time and money attempting to do so, in particular with our later stage drug candidates.•If we or our collaborators are unable to obtain regulatory approval in and outside of the United States for drug candidates, we and our collaborators will be unable to commercialize those drug candidates.•Health care reform measures could impact the pricing and profitability of pharmaceuticals, and adversely affect the commercial viability of our or our collaborators’ products and drug candidates. •Conflicts between us and our collaborators or termination of our collaboration agreements could limit future development and commercialization of our drug candidates and harm our business.•If we are unable to establish collaborations to fully exploit our drug discovery and development capabilities or if future collaborations are unsuccessful, our future revenue prospects could be diminished.•If we fail to enter into additional in-licensing agreements or if these arrangements are unsuccessful, we may be unable to increase our number of successfully marketed products and our revenues.•Even if one of our drug candidates receives regulatory approval, we may determine that commercialization would not be worth the investment.•Any approved drug product that we bring to the market may not gain market acceptance by physicians, patients, healthcare payors and others in the medical community.•We have limited capacity to conduct preclinical testing and clinical trials, and our resulting dependence on other parties could result in delays in and additional costs for our drug development efforts.•We face significant competition for our drug discovery and development efforts, and if we do not compete effectively, our commercial opportunities will be reduced or eliminated.•Our reliance on others to manufacture our drug products and drug candidates could result in drug supply constraints, delays in clinical trials, increased costs, and withdrawal or denial of regulatory approvals.•If we fail to comply with the extensive legal and regulatory requirements affecting the health care industry, we could face increased costs, penalties and a loss of business.•The illegal distribution and sale by third parties of counterfeit or unfit versions of our or our collaborators’ products or stolen products could harm our business and reputation.•As most of our drug discovery and development operations are conducted at our headquarters in Wilmington, Delaware, the loss of access to this facility would negatively impact our business.•If we lose any of our key employees or are unable to attract and retain additional personnel, our business and ability to achieve our objectives could be harmed.•If we fail to manage our growth effectively, our ability to develop and commercialize products could suffer.•We may acquire businesses or assets, form joint ventures or make investments in other companies that may be unsuccessful, divert our management’s attention and harm our operating results and prospects.•Risks associated with our operations outside of the United States could adversely affect our business.•If product liability lawsuits are brought against us, we could face substantial liabilities and may be required to limit commercialization of our products, and our results of operations could be harmed.•Because our activities involve the use of hazardous materials, we may be subject to claims relating to improper handling, storage or disposal of these materials that could be time consuming and costly.•We expect to continue to incur significant expenses to discover and develop drugs, which could result in future losses and impair our achievement of and ability to sustain profitability in the future.•If we are unable to raise additional capital in the future when we require it, our efforts to broaden our product portfolio or commercialization efforts could be limited.•Our marketable securities and long term investments are subject to risks that could adversely affect our overall financial position, and tax law changes could adversely affect our results of operations and financial condition.•If we are unable to achieve milestones, develop product candidates to license or renew or enter into new collaborations, our royalty and milestone revenues and future prospects for those revenues may decrease.•Any arbitration or litigation involving us and regarding intellectual property infringement claims could be costly and disrupt our drug discovery and development efforts.•Our inability to adequately protect or enforce our proprietary information may result in loss of revenues or otherwise reduce our ability to compete.•If the effective term of our patents is decreased or if we need to refile some of our patent applications, the value of our patent portfolio and the revenues we derive from it may be decreased.•International patent protection is particularly uncertain and costly, and our involvement in opposition proceedings may result in the expenditure of substantial sums and management resources.•Significant disruptions of information technology systems, breaches of data security, or unauthorized disclosures of sensitive data could harm our business and subject us to liability or reputational damage. •Increasing use of social media could give rise to liability, breaches of data security, or reputational damage, which could harm our business and results of operations.
Incyte is a biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of proprietary therapeutics. Our global headquarters is located in Wilmington, Delaware, where we conduct global clinical development and commercial operations. We also conduct clinical development and commercial operations from our European headquarters in Morges, Switzerland and our other offices across Europe, as well as our Japanese office in Tokyo and our Canadian headquarters in Montreal.As described in more detail below, we operate in two therapeutic areas that are defined by the indications of our approved medicines and the diseases for which our clinical candidates are being developed. One therapeutic area is Hematology/Oncology, which comprises Myeloproliferative Neoplasms (MPNs), Graft-Versus-Host Disease (GVHD), and solid tumors and hematologic malignancies. The other therapeutic area is Inflammation and Autoimmunity (IAI), which includes our Dermatology commercial franchise. We are also eligible to receive milestones and royalties on molecules discovered by us and licensed to third parties.
Our hematology and oncology franchise comprises five approved products, which are JAKAFI (ruxolitinib), MONJUVI (tafasitamab-cxix)/MINJUVI (tafasitamab), PEMAZYRE (pemigatinib), ICLUSIG (ponatinib) and ZYNYZ (retifanlimab-dlwr), as well as numerous clinical development programs.
JAKAFI (ruxolitinib) is our first product to be approved for sale in the United States. It was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in November 2011 for the treatment of adults with intermediate or high-risk myelofibrosis (MF); in December 2014 for the treatment of adults with polycythemia vera (PV) who have had an inadequate response to or are intolerant of hydroxyurea; in May 2019 for the treatment of steroid-refractory acute graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) in adult and pediatric patients 12 years and older; and in September 2021 for the treatment of chronic GVHD after failure of one or two lines of systemic therapy in adult and pediatric patients 12 years and older. MF and PV are both myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs), a type of rare blood cancer, and GVHD is an adverse immune response to an allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT). Under our collaboration agreement with our collaboration partner Novartis Pharmaceutical International Ltd., Novartis received exclusive development and commercialization rights to ruxolitinib outside of the United States for all hematologic and oncologic indications and sells ruxolitinib outside of the United States under the name JAKAVI.In 2003, we initiated a research and development program to explore the inhibition of enzymes called janus associated kinases (JAK). The JAK family is composed of four tyrosine kinases—JAK1, JAK2, JAK3 and Tyk2—that are involved in the signaling of a number of cytokines and growth factors. JAKs are central to a number of biologic processes, including the formation and development of blood cells and the regulation of immune functions. Dysregulation of the JAK-STAT signaling pathway has been associated with a number of diseases, including myeloproliferative neoplasms, other hematological malignancies, rheumatoid arthritis and other chronic inflammatory diseases. We have discovered multiple potent, selective and orally bioavailable JAK inhibitors that are selective for JAK1 or JAK1 and JAK2. JAKAFI is the most advanced compound in our JAK program. It is an oral JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor.JAKAFI is marketed in the United States through our own specialty sales force and commercial team. JAKAFI was the first FDA-approved JAK inhibitor for any indication, was the first FDA-approved product in MF, PV and steroid-refractory acute GVHD, and was recently approved in steroid-refractory chronic GVHD. JAKAFI remains the first-line standard of care in MF and remains the only FDA-approved product for steroid-refractory acute GVHD. The FDA has granted JAKAFI orphan drug status for MF, PV and GVHD.JAKAFI is distributed primarily through a network of specialty pharmacy providers and wholesalers that allow for efficient delivery of the medication by mail directly to patients or direct delivery to the patient’s pharmacy. Our distribution process uses a model that is well-established and familiar to physicians who practice within the oncology field.To further support appropriate use and future development of JAKAFI, our U.S. Medical Affairs department is responsible for providing appropriate scientific and medical education and information to physicians, preparing scientific presentations and publications, and overseeing the process for supporting investigator sponsored trials.Myelofibrosis. MF is a rare, life-threatening condition. MF, considered the most serious of the myeloproliferative neoplasms, can occur either as primary MF, or as secondary MF that develops in some patients who previously had polycythemia vera or essential thrombocythemia. We estimate there are between 16,000 and 18,500 patients with MF in the United States. Based on the modern prognostic scoring systems referred to as International Prognostic Scoring System and Dynamic International Prognostic Scoring System, we believe intermediate and high-risk patients represent 80% to 90% of all patients with MF in the United States and encompass patients over the age of 65, or patients who have or have ever had any of the following: anemia, constitutional symptoms, elevated white blood cell or blast counts, or platelet counts less than 100,000 per microliter of blood.Most MF patients have enlarged spleens and many suffer from debilitating symptoms, including abdominal discomfort, pruritus (itching), night sweats and cachexia (involuntary weight loss). There were no FDA approved therapies for MF until the approval of JAKAFI. The FDA approval was based on results from two randomized Phase III trials (COMFORT-I and COMFORT-II), which demonstrated that patients treated with JAKAFI experienced significant reductions in splenomegaly (enlarged spleen). COMFORT-I also demonstrated improvements in symptoms. The most common hematologic adverse reactions in both trials were thrombocytopenia and anemia. These events rarely led to discontinuation of JAKAFI treatment. The most common non-hematologic adverse reactions were bruising, dizziness and headache.In August 2014, the FDA approved supplemental labeling for JAKAFI to include Kaplan-Meier overall survival curves as well as additional safety and dosing information. The overall survival information is based on three-year data from COMFORT-I and II, and shows that at three years the probability of survival for patients treated with JAKAFI in COMFORT-I was 70% and for those patients originally randomized to placebo it was 61%. In COMFORT-II, at three years the probability of survival for patients treated with JAKAFI was 79% and for patients originally randomized to best available therapy it was 59%. In December 2016, we announced an exploratory pooled analysis of data from the five-year follow-up of the COMFORT-I and COMFORT-II trials of patients treated with JAKAFI, which further supported previously published overall survival findings.In September 2016, we announced that JAKAFI had been included as a recommended treatment in the latest National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology for myelofibrosis, underscoring the important and long term clinical benefits seen in patients treated with JAKAFI.In October 2017, the FDA approved updated labeling for JAKAFI to include the addition of new patient-reported outcome (PRO) data from the COMFORT-I study, as well as updating the warning related to progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. An exploratory analysis of PRO data of patients with myelofibrosis receiving JAKAFI showed improvement in fatigue-related symptoms at Week 24. Fatigue response (defined as a reduction of 4.5 points or more from baseline in the PROMIS® Fatigue total score) was reported in 35% of patients treated with JAKAFI versus 14% of the patients treated with placebo.Polycythemia Vera. PV is a myeloproliferative neoplasm typically characterized by elevated hematocrit, the volume percentage of red blood cells in whole blood, which can lead to a thickening of the blood and an increased risk of blood clots, as well as an elevated white blood cell and platelet count. When phlebotomy can no longer control PV, chemotherapy such as hydroxyurea, or interferon, is utilized. Approximately 25,000 patients with PV in the United States are considered uncontrolled because they have an inadequate response to or are intolerant of hydroxyurea, the most commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment of PV.In December 2014, the FDA approved JAKAFI for the treatment of patients with PV who have had an inadequate response to or are intolerant of hydroxyurea. The approval of JAKAFI for PV was based on data from the pivotal Phase III RESPONSE trial. In this trial, patients treated with JAKAFI demonstrated superior hematocrit control and reductions in spleen volume compared to best available therapy. In addition, a greater proportion of patients treated with JAKAFI achieved complete hematologic remission—which was defined as achieving hematocrit control, and lowering platelet and white blood cell counts. In the RESPONSE trial, the most common hematologic adverse reactions (incidence > 20%) were thrombocytopenia and anemia. The most common non-hematologic adverse events (incidence >10%) were headache, abdominal pain, diarrhea, dizziness, fatigue, pruritus, dyspnea and muscle spasms.In March 2016, the FDA approved supplemental labeling for JAKAFI to include additional safety data as well as efficacy analyses from the RESPONSE trial to assess the durability of response in JAKAFI treated patients after 80 weeks. At this time, 83% patients were still on treatment, and 76% of the responders at 32 weeks maintained their response through 80 weeks.In June 2016, we announced data from the Phase III RESPONSE-2 study of JAKAFI in patients with inadequately controlled PV that was resistant to or intolerant of hydroxyurea who did not have an enlarged spleen. These data showed that JAKAFI was superior to best available therapy in maintaining hematocrit control (62.2% vs. 18.7%, respectively; P<0.0001) without the need for phlebotomy.In August 2017, we announced that JAKAFI had been included as a recommended treatment in the latest NCCN Guidelines for patients with polycythemia vera who have had an inadequate response to first-line therapies, such as hydroxyurea.Graft-versus-host disease. GVHD is a condition that can occur after an allogeneic HSCT (the transfer of genetically dissimilar stem cells or tissue). In GVHD, the donated bone marrow or peripheral blood stem cells view the recipient’s body as foreign and attack various tissues. 12-month survival rates in patients with Grade III or IV steroid-refractory acute GVHD are 50% or less, and the incidence of steroid-refractory acute and chronic GVHD is approximately 3,000 per year in the United States.In June 2016, we announced that the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy designation for ruxolitinib in patients with acute GVHD. In May 2019, the FDA approved JAKAFI for the treatment of steroid-refractory acute GVHD in adult and pediatric patients 12 years and older. The approval was based on data from REACH1, an open-label, single-arm, multicenter study of JAKAFI in combination with corticosteroids in patients with steroid-refractory grade II-IV acute GVHD. The overall response rate (ORR) in patients refractory to steroids alone was 57% with a complete response (CR) rate of 31%. The most frequently reported adverse reactions among all study participants were infections (55%) and edema (51%), and the most common laboratory abnormalities were anemia (75%), thrombocytopenia (75%) and neutropenia (58%).In September 2021, the FDA approved JAKAFI for the treatment of chronic GVHD after failure of one or two lines of systemic therapy in adult and pediatric patients 12 years and older. This approval was based on data from REACH3, a Phase III, randomized, open-label, multicenter study of JAKAFI in comparison to best available therapy for treatment of steroid-refractory chronic GVHD after allogeneic stem cell transplantation. The overall response rate through Cycle 7 Day 1 was 70% for JAKAFI compared to 57% for best available therapy. The most common hematologic adverse reactions (incidence > 35%) were anemia and thrombocytopenia. The most common non-hematologic adverse reactions (incidence ≥ 20%) were infections (pathogen not specified) and viral infection. In addition, the FDA updated labeling for JAKAFI to include warnings of increased risk of major adverse cardiovascular events, thrombosis, and secondary malignancies related to another JAK-inhibitor treating rheumatoid arthritis, a condition for which JAKAFI is not indicated. In patients with MF and PV treated with JAKAFI in clinical trials, the rates of thromboembolic events were similar in JAKAFI and control treated patients. We have retained all development and commercialization rights to JAKAFI in the United States and are eligible to receive development and sales milestones as well as royalties from product sales outside the United States. We hold patents that cover the composition of matter and use of ruxolitinib. These patents, including applicable extensions, currently expire in mid-2028 and late-2028. In December 2022, we were granted pediatric exclusivity which adds six months to the expiration for all ruxolitinib patents listed in FDA’s Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations (Orange Book) as of the date of the grant.
In January 2020, we and MorphoSys AG entered into a collaboration and license agreement to further develop and commercialize MorphoSys’ proprietary anti-CD19 antibody tafasitamab (MOR208) globally. The agreement became effective March 2020. Tafasitamab is an Fc-engineered antibody against CD19 currently in clinical development for the treatment of B cell malignancies. We have rights to co-commercialize tafasitamab in the United States with MorphoSys, and we have exclusive development and commercialization rights outside of the United States. In July 2020, we and MorphoSys announced that the FDA approved MONJUVI (tafasitamab-cxix), which is indicated in combination with lenalidomide for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) not otherwise specified, including DLBCL arising from low grade lymphoma, and who are not eligible for autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT). MONJUVI was approved under accelerated approval based on overall response rate from the MorphoSys-sponsored Phase II L-MIND study, an open label, multicenter, single arm trial of MONJUVI in combination with lenalidomide as a treatment for adult patients with r/r DLBCL. Results from the study showed an objective response rate (ORR) of 55% (39 out of 71 patients; primary endpoint) and a complete response (CR) rate of 37% (26 out of 71 patients). The median duration of response (mDOR) was 21.7 months. The most frequent serious adverse reactions were infections (26%), including pneumonia (7%) and febrile neutropenia (6%). Updated three-year data from L-MIND were presented at the American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) 2021 and final five-year data were presented at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) 2023, which showed that the Monjuvi plus lenalidomide regimen followed by Monjuvi monotherapy provided prolonged, durable responses in adult patients with r/r DLBCL. In August 2020, we and MorphoSys announced that MONJUVI in combination with lenalidomide had been included in the latest National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology for B-cell Lymphomas. In August 2021, we and MorphoSys announced that the European Commission (EC) granted conditional marketing authorization for MINJUVI (tafasitamab) in combination with lenalidomide, followed by MINJUVI monotherapy, for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory DLBCL who are not eligible for autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT). The conditional approval was based on the three-year results from the L-MIND study evaluating the safety and efficacy of MINJUVI in combination with lenalidomide as a treatment for patients with r/r DLBCL who are not eligible for ASCT. The results showed best objective response rate (ORR) of 56.8% (primary endpoint), including a complete response (CR) rate of 39.5% and a partial response rate (PR) of 17.3%, as assessed by an independent review committee. The median duration of response (mDOR) was 43.9 months after a minimum follow up of 35 months (secondary endpoint). MINJUVI together with lenalidomide was shown to provide a clinically meaningful response and the side effects were manageable. Warnings and precautions for MINJUVI include infusion-related reactions, myelosuppression, including neutropenia and thrombocytopenia, infections and tumour lysis syndrome.DLBCL is the most common type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma in adults worldwide, comprising 40% of all cases. DLBCL is characterized by rapidly growing masses of malignant B-cells in the lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow or other organs. It is an aggressive disease with ~40% of patients not responding to initial therapy or relapsing thereafter. We estimate that there are ~10,000 patients diagnosed in the United States each year with r/r DLBCL who are not eligible for ASCT. In the EU, we estimate there are ~14,000 patients diagnosed each year with r/r DLBCL who are not eligible for ASCT.
PEMAZYRE is the first internally discovered product to be internationally commercialized by us.In April 2020, we announced that the FDA approved PEMAZYRE (pemigatinib), a selective fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) kinase inhibitor, for the treatment of adults with previously treated, unresectable locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma with an FGFR2 fusion or other rearrangement as detected by an FDA-approved test. PEMAZYRE is the first FDA-approved treatment for this indication, which was approved under accelerated approval based on overall response rate and duration of response (DOR). In March 2021, PEMAZYRE was approved by the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare (MHLW) for the treatment of patients with unresectable biliary tract cancer (BTC) with an FGFR2 fusion gene, worsening after cancer chemotherapy. Also in March 2021, PEMAZYRE was approved by the European Commission (EC) for the treatment of adults with locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma with an FGFR2 fusion or rearrangement that have progressed after at least one prior line of systemic therapy. In July 2021, the UK’s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommended PEMAZYRE for patients with cholangiocarcinoma with a fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) fusion or rearrangement that have progressed after at least one prior line of systemic therapy. NICE’s guidance enables all eligible patients in England and Wales to have access to PEMAZYRE through the National Health Service (NHS).In March 2022, PEMAZYRE was approved by the National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) of the People’s Republic of China for the treatment of adults with locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma with a fibroblast growth receptor 2 (FGFR2) fusion or rearrangement as confirmed by a validated diagnostic test that have progressed after at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Cholangiocarcinoma is a rare cancer that arises from the cells within the bile ducts. It is often diagnosed late (stages III and IV) and the prognosis is poor. The incidence of cholangiocarcinoma with FGFR2 fusions or rearrangements is increasing, and it is currently estimated that there are 2,000-3,000 patients in the United States, Europe and Japan.The approval of PEMAZYRE was based on data from FIGHT-202, a multi-center, open-label, single-arm study evaluating PEMAZYRE as a treatment for adults with cholangiocarcinoma. In FIGHT-202, and in patients harboring FGFR2 fusions or rearrangements (Cohort A), PEMAZYRE monotherapy resulted in an overall response rate of 36% (primary endpoint), and median DOR of 9.1 months (secondary endpoint). FIGHT-302, a Phase III trial of pemigatinib for the first-line treatment of patients with cholangiocarcinoma and FGFR2 fusions or rearrangements, is ongoing.In August 2022, PEMAZYRE was approved by the FDA as the first and only targeted treatment for myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms (MLNs) with FGFR1 rearrangement. MLNs with FGFR1 rearrangement are extremely rare and aggressive blood cancers. In March 2023, PEMAZYRE was approved by the MHLW for the treatment of MLNs with FGFR1 fusion.
In June 2016, we acquired the European operations of ARIAD Pharmaceuticals, Inc. and obtained an exclusive license to develop and commercialize ICLUSIG (ponatinib) in Europe and other select countries. ICLUSIG is a kinase inhibitor. The primary target for ICLUSIG is BCR-ABL, an abnormal tyrosine kinase that is expressed in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and Philadelphia-chromosome positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL).In the European Union, ICLUSIG is approved for the treatment of adult patients with chronic phase, accelerated phase or blast phase CML who are resistant to dasatinib or nilotinib; who are intolerant to dasatinib or nilotinib and for whom subsequent treatment with imatinib is not clinically appropriate; or who have the T315I mutation, or the treatment of adult patients with Ph+ ALL who are resistant to dasatinib; who are intolerant to dasatinib and for whom subsequent treatment with imatinib is not clinically appropriate; or who have the T315I mutation.
In October 2017, we and MacroGenics, Inc. announced an exclusive global collaboration and license agreement for MacroGenics’ retifanlimab (formerly INCMGA0012), an investigational monoclonal antibody that inhibits PD-1. Under this collaboration, we obtained exclusive worldwide rights for the development and commercialization of retifanlimab in all indications. The molecule is currently being evaluated both as monotherapy and in combination therapy across various tumor types. Two Phase III trials evaluating retifanlimab in squamous cell anal cancer (SCAC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are ongoing. In March 2023, we announced that the FDA approved ZYNYZ (retifanlimab-dlwr), a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting programmed death receptor-1 (PD-1), under accelerated approval, for the treatment of adults with metastatic or recurrent locally advanced Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC). This represents the first regulatory approval for our PD-1 inhibitor.
In early 2023, as part of our efforts to continuously optimize our R&D portfolio, we prioritized several programs in dermatology and oncology that we determined to have high potential value. As part of this process, we also de-prioritized and discontinued certain programs, including parsaclisib in myelofibrosis and warm hemolytic anemia, as well as certain early stage programs.
As part of our ongoing LIMBER (Leadership In MPNs BEyond Ruxolitinib) clinical development initiative, which is designed to improve and expand therapeutic options for patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms, we are evaluating combinations of ruxolitinib with other therapeutic modalities, as well as developing a once-a-day formulation of ruxolitinib for potential use as monotherapy and combination therapy. Bioavailability and bioequivalence data were published for ruxolitinib’s once-daily (QD) extended release (XR) formulation at the European Hematology Association (EHA) 2021 Virtual Congress in June 2021. In March 2023, the FDA issued a complete response letter for ruxolitinib extended-release (XR) tablets for once-daily (QD) use in the treatment of certain types of MF, PV and GVHD. The complete response letter stated that the FDA could not approve the application in its present form but acknowledged that the study submitted in the NDA met its objective of bioequivalence based on area under the curve parameters but identified additional requirements for approval. We will work with the FDA to determine the appropriate next steps.Phase II trials combining ruxolitinib with investigational agents from our portfolio such as INCB57643 (BET) and INCB00928 (ALK2) in patients with MF are ongoing, and additional discovery and development initiatives are also ongoing within the LIMBER program, which are evaluating internally-discovered compounds, and candidates from collaboration partners. We recently announced the discontinuation of LIMBER-304 and LIMBER-313, two Phase III studies evaluating ruxolitinib in combination with parsaclisib in MF patients with a suboptimal response to ruxolitinib monotherapy and in first-line MF, respectively. These studies were discontinued as a result of planned interim analyses which indicated that the studies were unlikely to meet their primary endpoint in the intent-to-treat patient population. The recommendation to stop the studies was not due to safety.
In September 2021, we and Syndax Pharmaceuticals, Inc. announced an exclusive worldwide collaboration and license agreement to develop and commercialize axatilimab, Syndax’s anti-CSF-1R monoclonal antibody. Together, we plan to develop axatilimab as a therapy for patients with chronic GVHD as well as in additional immune-mediated diseases where CSF-1R-dependent monocytes and macrophages are believed to contribute to organ fibrosis. In December 2021, updated positive data were presented at ASH from the Phase I/II trial evaluating axatilimab as a monotherapy in patients with recurrent or refractory chronic GVHD after two or more prior lines of therapy. A 68% overall response rate and broad clinical benefit across multiple organs were observed at doses being assessed in AGAVE-201, a global pivotal trial evaluating axatilimab monotherapy in patients with chronic GVHD in the third line setting. Additional trials of axatilimab are planned in patients with chronic GVHD, including a Phase II trial in combination with ruxolitinib in patients with cGVHD. In May 2022, Syndax announced that axatilimab was granted fast-track designation by the FDA for the treatment of patients with chronic GVHD after failure of two or more lines of systemic therapy.
In December 2022, new research detailing the development and mechanism of action of INCA033989, an Incyte-discovered, investigational novel anti-mutant calreticulin (CALR)-targeted monoclonal antibody, was featured in the Plenary Scientific Session at the 64th American Society of Hematology (ASH) Annual Meeting. INCA033989 binds with high affinity to mutant CALR and inhibits oncogenesis, the process of cells becoming cancerous, in cells expressing this oncoprotein. CALR mutations are responsible for disease development in approximately 25-35% of patients with MF and ET. INCA033989 is expected to enter clinical studies in 2023.
Tafasitamab is an anti-CD19 antibody and is being investigated as a therapeutic option in B cell malignancies in a number of ongoing and planned combination trials. An open-label Phase II combination trial (L-MIND) is investigating the safety and efficacy of tafasitamab in combination with lenalidomide in patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (r/r DLBCL), and the ongoing Phase III B-MIND trial is assessing the combination of tafasitamab and bendamustine versus rituximab and bendamustine in r/r DLBCL. firstMIND is a Phase Ib safety trial of tafasitamab as a first-line therapy for patients with DLBCL, and frontMIND, a placebo-controlled Phase III trial evaluating tafasitamab in combination with lenalidomide added to rituximab plus chemotherapy (R-CHOP) as a first-line therapy for patients with DLBCL, is ongoing.A placebo-controlled Phase III trial (inMIND) of tafasitamab added to lenalidomide plus rituximab (R2) in patients with relapsed or refractory follicular or marginal zone lymphomas is ongoing. In January 2021, the FDA granted orphan drug designation to tafasitamab as a treatment for patients with follicular lymphoma.
Pemigatinib is a potent and selective inhibitor of the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) isoforms 1, 2 and 3 with demonstrated activity in preclinical studies. The FGFR family of receptor tyrosine kinases can act as oncogenic drivers in a number of liquid and solid tumor types.We initiated the FIGHT clinical program to evaluate pemigatinib across a spectrum of cancers that are driven by FGF/FGFR alterations. The program initially included three Phase II trials – FIGHT-201 in patients with bladder cancer, FIGHT-202 in patients with cholangiocarcinoma, and FIGHT-203 in patients with myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms with FGFR1 rearrangement. Based on data generated from these trials, we have initiated additional trials including FIGHT-302, a Phase III study in first-line cholangiocarcinoma. FIGHT-207, a solid tumor-agnostic trial evaluating pemigatinib in patients with driver-alterations of FGF/FGFR, is now closed to recruitment. Based on findings from this study, we have identified populations that may potentially benefit from treatment with pemigatinib and a Phase II trial, FIGHT-209, in patients with glioblastoma is ongoing.Pemigatinib has Breakthrough Therapy designation as a treatment for patients with myeloid/lymphoid neoplasms (MLN) with FGFR1 rearrangement who have relapsed or are refractory to initial chemotherapy.
The Phase III POD1UM-303 trial of retifanlimab in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy as a first-line treatment for patients with squamous cell carcinoma of the anal canal (SCAC) is ongoing. In July 2021, we announced that the FDA issued a complete response letter (CRL) for the BLA of retifanlimab for the treatment of SCAC. In October 2021, we announced that we withdrew the MAA seeking approval of retifanlimab in SCAC. The Phase III POD1UM-304 trial is evaluating retifanlimab in combination with platinum-based chemotherapy as a first-line treatment for patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
In November 2021, we highlighted Phase I clinical safety and efficacy data for our oral PD-L1 program which included two compounds, INCB99280 and INCB99318. Tumor shrinkage was observed for both oral PD-L1 inhibitors and both were generally well tolerated. We plan to evaluate INCB99280 in Phase II as monotherapy and in combination with other antitumor agents. Further dose escalation and dose expansion trials are ongoing with INCB99318. In November 2022, (i) updated safety and preliminary efficacy data for INCB99280 and INCB99318 was presented at the Society for Immunotherapy of Cancer, and (ii) we and Mirati Therapeutics, Inc. announced a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement to investigate the combination of INCB99280 and adagrasib, a KRASG12C selective inhibitor, in patients with KRASG12C-mutated solid tumors.
1.Development collaboration with Cellenkos, Inc.2.axatilimab development in collaboration with Syndax.3.tafasitamab development in collaboration with MorphoSys.4.retifanlimab licensed from MacroGenics.5.Clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Mirati Therapeutics.
In the cell cycle, the serine threonine kinase, CDK2, regulates the transition from the G1 phase (cell growth) to the S-phase (DNA replication). INCB123667 is a novel, potent and selective oral small molecule inhibitor of CDK2 which has been shown to suppress tumor growth as monotherapy and in combination with standard of care, in Cyclin E amplified tumor models, in vivo. In April 2023, we presented data at the American Association for Cancer Research (AACR) Annual Meeting, demonstrating INCB123667 exhibited significant single-agent activity in vivo, in CCNE1high breast cancer xenograft and patient-derived xenograft models. INCB123667 is currently being evaluated in a Phase I clinical trial in patients with advanced malignancies including CCNE1high TNBC and HR+HER2- tumors post-CDK4/6 inhibitors.
In collaboration with Merus N.V. we have developed INCA32459, a novel LAG3xPD-1 bispecific antibody that is currently being evaluated in clinical studies.
INCA33890 is a TGFβR2xPD-1 bispecific antibody which has been engineered to avoid the known toxicity of broad TGFβ pathway blockade. INCA33989 has a 10-fold higher binding affinity for PD-1 relative to TGFβR2, and blocks TGFβ signaling specifically in cells co-expressing PD-1. In April 2023, we presented preclinical data at AACR which showed INCA33890 inhibits tumor growth in PD-1-resistant mouse models.Our earlier-stage clinical programs in hematology and oncology, are included in the table below. We intend to describe these programs more fully if we obtain clinical proof-of-concept and establish that a program warrants further development in a specific indication or group of indications.
1. Discovery collaboration with Agenus Inc.
2. Development collaboration with Merus
Incyte Dermatology launched its first approved product, OPZELURA (ruxolitinib) cream, in October 2021, following FDA approval for atopic dermatitis in September 2021. OPZELURA was subsequently approved by the FDA and European Commission for vitiligo in July 2022 and April 2023, respectively.  Incyte’s IAI efforts also include numerous clinical development programs.
Atopic Dermatitis. In September 2021, we announced that the FDA approved OPZELURA (ruxolitinib) cream, a novel cream formulation of Incyte’s selective JAK1/JAK2 inhibitor ruxolitinib, for the topical short-term and non-continuous chronic treatment of mild to moderate atopic dermatitis (AD) in non-immunocompromised patients 12 years of age and older whose disease is not adequately controlled with topical prescription therapies, or when those therapies are not advisable.AD is a skin disorder that causes long term inflammation of the skin resulting in itchy, red, swollen and cracked skin. Onset can occur at any age, but is more common in infants and children. In the United States, we estimate that there are approximately 10 million diagnosed adolescent and adult patients with AD.The approval of OPZELURA was based on data from two randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled Phase III studies (TRuE-AD1 and TRuE-AD 2) evaluating the safety and efficacy of OPZELURA in adolescents and adults with mild to moderate AD. Significantly more patients treated with OPZELURA achieved Investigator’s Global Assessment (IGA) Treatment Success at Week 8 (defined as an IGA score of 0 or 1 with at least a 2-point improvement from baseline, the primary endpoint: 53.8% in TRuE-AD1 and 51.3% in TRuE-AD2, compared to vehicle (15.1% in TRuE-AD1, 7.6% in TRuE-AD2; P<0.0001)). Significantly more patients treated with OPZELURA experienced a clinically meaningful reduction in itch from baseline at Week 8, as measured by a ≥4-point reduction in the itch Numerical Rating Scale (itch NRS4): 52.2% in TRuE-AD1 and 50.7% in TRuE-AD2, compared to vehicle (15.4% in TRuE-AD1, 16.3% in TRuE-AD2; P<0.0001), among patients with an NRS score of at least 4 at baseline. The most common (≥1%) treatment-emergent adverse reactions in patients treated with OPZELURA were nasopharyngitis, diarrhea, bronchitis, ear infection, eosinophil count increased, urticaria, folliculitis, tonsillitis and rhinorrhea.Vitiligo. In July 2022, we announced that the FDA approved OPZELURA for the topical treatment of nonsegmental vitiligo in adult and pediatric patients 12 years of age and older. OPZELURA was approved for continuous use and no limits to duration as a treatment for nonsegmental vitiligo.Vitiligo is a chronic autoimmune depigmenting skin disease characterized by patches of the skin losing their pigment. It is estimated that there are at least 1.5 million patients diagnosed with vitiligo in the United States, with the majority of patients (approximately 85%) suffering from nonsegmental vitiligo. OPZELURA is the first and only FDA approved treatment for repigmentation of vitiligo lesions.The approval of OPZELURA in vitiligo was based on two randomized, double-blind, vehicle-controlled Phase III studies (TRuE-V1 and TRuE-V2) evaluating the safety and efficacy of OPZELURA in adolescents and adults with nonsegmental vitiligo. Treatment with 1.5% ruxolitinib cream twice daily (BID) resulted in greater improvement versus vehicle for the primary and all key secondary endpoints in both the TRuE-V1 and TRuE-V2 studies. Results, which were consistent across both studies, showed that 29.9% of patients applying ruxolitinib cream achieved >75% improvement from baseline in the facial Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (F-VASI75) at Week 24, the primary endpoint. At Week 52, approximately 50% of patients achieved F-VASI75. The most common (>1%) treatment-emergent adverse reactions in patients treated with OPZELURA were application site acne, application site pruritus, nasopharyngitis, headache, urinary tract infection, application site erythema and pyrexia. In March 2023, at the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD), long-term 104-week safety and efficacy data for ruxolitinib cream in vitiligo were presented, demonstrating that patients who achieved a high level of facial repigmentation (≥F-VASI90) at Week 52 maintained durable response one year following withdrawal of treatment and that those patients who continued treatment with Opzelura for up to two years demonstrated sustained facial repigmentation and further improvements in facial and total body repigmentation.In April 2023, we announced that the European Commission approved OPZELURA for the topical treatment of nonsegmental vitiligo with facial involvement in adults and adolescents 12 years and older following a positive opinion from the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP).
Ruxolitinib cream is a potent, selective inhibitor of JAK1 and JAK2 that provides the opportunity to directly target diverse pathogenic pathways that underlie certain dermatologic conditions, including atopic dermatitis, vitiligo, lichen planus, lichen sclerosus, hidradenitis suppurativa and prurigo nodularis.In October 2021, we announced the validation of the MAA for ruxolitinib cream as a potential treatment for adolescents and adults (age ≥12 years) with nonsegmental vitiligo with facial involvement. In November 2022, we initiated two Phase II trials evaluating ruxolitinib cream in lichen planus and lichen sclerosus. Lichen planus is a recurrent inflammatory condition affecting the skin and mucosal surfaces and can result in itchy, purple bumps on the skin. Lichen sclerosus is a chronic inflammatory skin disease most commonly affecting women and can result in painful ulcers and intense itching. A Phase II trial evaluating ruxolitinib cream in mild to moderate hidradenitis suppurativa is ongoing and two Phase III trials evaluating ruxolitinib cream in prurigo nodularis were initiated. We continue to expand the development of ruxolitinib cream into new indications as part of our efforts to maximize the potential opportunity with ruxolitinib cream.
We are also developing povorcitinib (formerly INCB54707), which is an oral small molecule selective JAK1 inhibitor. Povorcitinib is undergoing evaluation in patients with hidradenitis suppurativa (HS), a chronic skin condition where lesions develop as a result of inflammation and infection of the sweat glands. In October 2020, initial results from the clinical program were presented and a randomized Phase IIb trial of povorcitinib is underway in patients with HS.In March 2021, we initiated a Phase II trial evaluating povorcitinib in patients with vitiligo. A Phase II trial evaluating povorcitinib in patients with prurigo nodularis is ongoing. In August 2022, we presented results from the Phase II trial of povorcitinib in HS. In December 2022, we initiated two Phase III trials (STOP-HS1 and STOP-HS2) in moderate to severe hidradenitis suppurativa. In February 2023, 52-week results from the Phase II study evaluating povorcitinib in HS were presented as an oral presentation at the European Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation (EHSF) Annual Meeting. The data demonstrated that longer-term treatment with povorcitinib 75 mg resulted in sustained and durable efficacy across all treatment arms and importantly, 22-29% of patients achieved HiSCR100, which is defined as a 100% reduction from baseline in total AN count with no increase from baseline in abscess or draining tunnel count. Povorcitinib is currently in two phase 3 studies in moderate to severe HS.In March 2023, 36-week results from the Phase IIb study evaluating povorcitinib in patients with extensive vitiligo were presented as an oral late-breaking presentation at the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) Annual Meeting. The data demonstrated that treatment with oral povorcitinib was associated with substantial total body repigmentation in patients with extensive nonsegmental vitiligo, as measured by total Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (T-VASI) scores. Specifically, the study met its primary endpoint and patients receiving povorcitinib experienced statistically superior improvements in T-VASI at Week 24 compared to placebo.
In November 2022, we acquired Villaris Therapeutics, Inc., an asset-centric biopharmaceutical company focused on the development of novel antibody therapeutics for vitiligo. Its lead asset, auremolimab (VM6) is a novel, humanized anti-IL-15Rβ monoclonal antibody designed to target and deplete autoreactive tissue resident memory T cells (TRM) that has demonstrated efficacy as a treatment for vitiligo in preclinical models. IND-enabling studies are underway, and clinical development for auremolimab is currently expected to begin in 2023.
1. Novartis’ rights for ruxolitinib outside of the United States under our Collaboration and License Agreement with Novartis do not include topical administration.
In May 2022, we initiated a Phase II trial evaluating INCB00928 in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP), a disorder in which muscle tissue and connective tissue are gradually replaced by bone. The FDA has granted Fast Track designation and orphan drug designation to INCB00928 as a treatment for patients with FOP.Indication and statusINCB00928 (ALK2)Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: Phase II
As described below under “—License Agreements and Business Relationships,” we are eligible for milestone payments and royalties on certain products that we licensed to third parties. These include OLUMIANT (baricitinib), which is licensed to our collaborative partner Eli Lilly and Company, and JAKAVI (ruxolitinib) and TABRECTA (capmatinib), which are licensed to Novartis.
We have a second JAK1 and JAK2 inhibitor, baricitinib, which is subject to our collaboration agreement with Lilly, in which Lilly received exclusive worldwide development and commercialization rights to the compound for inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. Rheumatoid Arthritis. Rheumatoid arthritis is an autoimmune disease characterized by aberrant or abnormal immune mechanisms that lead to joint inflammation and swelling and, in some patients, the progressive destruction of joints. Rheumatoid arthritis can also affect connective tissue in the skin and organs of the body.Current rheumatoid arthritis treatments include the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drugs, such as methotrexate, and the newer biological response modifiers that target pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as tumor necrosis factor, implicated in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. None of these approaches to treatment is curative; therefore, there remains an unmet need for new safe and effective treatment options for these patients. Rheumatoid arthritis is estimated to affect about 1% of the world’s population.The Phase III program of baricitinib in patients with rheumatoid arthritis incorporated all three rheumatoid arthritis populations (methotrexate naïve, biologic naïve, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor inadequate responders); used event rates to fully power the baricitinib program for structural comparison and non-inferiority vs. adalimumab; and evaluated patient-reported outcomes. All four Phase III trials met their respective primary endpoints.In January 2016, Lilly submitted an NDA to the FDA and an MAA to the EMA for baricitinib as treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. In February 2017, we and Lilly announced that the European Commission approved baricitinib as OLUMIANT for the treatment of moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis in adult patients who have responded inadequately to, or who are intolerant to, one or more disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). In July 2017, the MHLW granted marketing approval for OLUMIANT for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (including the prevention of structural injury of joints) in patients with inadequate response to standard-of-care therapies. In June 2018, the FDA approved the 2mg dose of OLUMIANT for the treatment of adults with moderately-to-severely active rheumatoid arthritis (RA) who have had an inadequate response to one or more tumor necrosis factor (TNF) inhibitor therapies.Atopic Dermatitis. Lilly has conducted a Phase IIa trial and a Phase III program to evaluate the safety and efficacy of baricitinib in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis. The JAK-STAT pathway has been shown to play an essential role in the dysregulation of immune responses in atopic dermatitis. Therefore, we believe that inhibiting cytokine pathways dependent on JAK1 and JAK2 may lead to positive clinical outcomes in AD. In February 2019, we and Lilly announced that baricitinib met the primary endpoint in BREEZE-AD1 and BREEZE-AD2, two Phase III studies evaluating the efficacy and safety of baricitinib monotherapy for the treatment of adult patients with moderate-to-severe AD and, in August 2019, we and Lilly announced that baricitinib met the primary endpoint in BREEZE-AD7, a Phase III study evaluating the efficacy and safety of baricitinib in combination with standard-of-care topical corticosteroids in patients with moderate-to-severe AD. In January 2020, we and Lilly announced that baricitinib met the primary endpoint in both BREEZE-AD4 and BREEZE-AD5, the results of which completed the placebo-controlled data program intended to support global registrations. A supplemental New Drug Application (sNDA) for baricitinib was submitted by Lilly for the treatment of patients with moderate to severe AD. In April 2021, we and Lilly announced the FDA extended the review period for the sNDA for baricitinib for the treatment of moderate to severe AD by three months to allow time for additional data analyses. In July 2021, we and Lilly announced that the FDA will not meet the PDUFA action date for the sNDA for baricitinib for the treatment of adults with moderate to severe AD due to the FDA's ongoing assessment of JAK inhibitors. In January 2022, Lilly provided a regulatory update on the sNDA based on ongoing discussions with the FDA. Lilly announced that alignment with the FDA on the indicated population had not yet been reached and given the FDA’s position, there would be the possibility of a Complete Response Letter (CRL).In January 2020, Lilly announced that baricitinib had been submitted for regulatory review in Europe as a treatment for patients with moderate-to-severe AD. In October 2020, Lilly announced that the European Commission approved baricitinib as OLUMIANT for the treatment of moderate-to-severe AD in adult patients who are candidates for systemic therapy. In December 2020, baricitinib was approved by the MHLW for the treatment of patients with moderate-to-severe AD.Alopecia Areata. Alopecia areata is an autoimmune disorder in which the immune system attacks the hair follicles, causing hair loss in patches. In March 2020, Lilly announced that baricitinib received Breakthrough Therapy designation for the treatment of alopecia areata, based on the positive Phase II results of Lilly’s adaptive Phase II/III study BRAVE-AA1. In March 2021, we and Lilly announced positive results from BRAVE-AA2, the Phase III trial evaluating the efficacy and safety of once-daily baricitinib in adults with severe alopecia areata. In April 2021, we and Lilly announced positive results from the Phase III portion of BRAVE-AA1. In September 2021, we and Lilly announced detailed results from BRAVE-AA1 and BRAVE-AA2 at the European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Congress (EADV). The two studies showed statistically significant improvement in scalp hair regrowth across both baricitinib dosing groups when compared to placebo. In March 2022, we and Lilly announced positive 52 week results from BRAVE-AA1 and BRAVE-AA2 at the American Academy of Dermatology (AAD) annual meeting showing 40% of adults saw at least 80% scalp coverage. In June 2022, the FDA approved 2mg, and 4mg doses of OLUMIANT for the treatment of adults with severe alopecia areata, becoming the first and only systemic treatment in the indication. In June 2022, OLUMIANT was approved as a treatment for alopecia areata in Europe and Japan.Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic disease that causes inflammation. In addition to affecting the skin and joints, it can affect other organs in the body such as the kidneys, the tissue lining the lungs and heart, and the brain. Lilly has conducted a Phase II trial to evaluate the safety and efficacy of baricitinib in patients with SLE. Baricitinib’s activity profile suggests that it inhibits cytokines implicated in SLE such as type I interferon (IFN), type II IFN-γ, IL-6, and IL-23 as well as other cytokines that may have a role in SLE, including granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and IL-12. In January 2022, Lilly announced the discontinuation of the Phase III development program for baricitinib in SLE based on top-line efficacy results from two pivotal Phase III trials (SLE-BRAVE-I and –II). The primary endpoint of SRI-4 response was reached in SLE-BRAVE-I but was not reached in SLE-BRAVE-II and key secondary endpoints were not met in either study.COVID-19. In May 2020, we amended our agreement with Lilly to enable Lilly to commercialize baricitinib for the treatment of COVID-19. In November 2020, we and Lilly announced that the FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for the distribution and emergency use of baricitinib to be used in combination with remdesivir in hospitalized adult and pediatric patients two years of age or older with suspected or laboratory confirmed COVID-19 who require supplemental oxygen, invasive mechanical ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. In December 2020, we and Lilly announced that data from ACTT-2 supportive of the EUA were published in the New England Journal of Medicine. In July 2021, we and Lilly announced that the FDA broadened the EUA for baricitinib to allow for treatment with or without remdesivir. The EUA now provides for the use of baricitinib for treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized adults and pediatric patients two years of age or older requiring supplemental oxygen, non-invasive or invasive mechanical ventilation or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO).  In June 2022, we and Lilly announced the FDA approved baricitinib as OLUMIANT for the treatment of COVID-19 in hospitalized adults requiring supplemental oxygen, non-invasive or invasive mechanical ventilation or ECMO.
Capmatinib is a potent and highly selective MET inhibitor. The investigational compound has demonstrated inhibitory activity in cell-based biochemical and functional assays that measure MET signaling and MET dependent cell proliferation, survival and migration. Under our agreement, Novartis received worldwide exclusive development and commercialization rights to capmatinib and certain back-up compounds in all indications. Capmatinib is being evaluated in patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, non-small cell lung cancer and other solid tumors, and may have potential utility as a combination agent.MET is a clinically validated receptor kinase cancer target. Abnormal MET activation in cancer correlates with poor prognosis. Dysregulation of the MET pathway triggers tumor growth, formation of new blood vessels that supply the tumor with nutrients, and causes cancer to spread to other organs. Dysregulation of the MET pathway is seen in many types of cancers, including lung, kidney, liver, stomach, breast and brain.In May 2020, we and Novartis announced the FDA approval of capmatinib as TABRECTA for the treatment of adult patients with metastatic NSCLC whose tumors have a mutation that leads to MET exon 14 skipping (METex14) as detected by an FDA-approved test. TABRECTA is the first and only treatment approved to specifically target NSCLC with this driver mutation and is approved for first-line and previously treated patients regardless of prior treatment type. The FDA approval of TABRECTA was based on results from the pivotal GEOMETRY mono-1 study. In the METex14 population (n=97), the confirmed overall response rate was 68% and 41% among treatment-naive (n=28) and previously treated patients (n=69), respectively, based on the Blinded Independent Review Committee (BIRC) assessment per RECIST v1.1. In patients taking TABRECTA, the study also demonstrated a median duration of response of 12.6 months in treatment-naive patients (19 responders) and 9.7 months in previously treated patients (28 responders). The most common treatment-related adverse events (AEs) (incidence ≥20%) are peripheral edema, nausea, fatigue, vomiting, dyspnea, and decreased appetite. In September 2020, we and Novartis announced that GEOMETRY mono-1 results were published in The New England Journal of Medicine.In June 2020, we and Novartis announced that the MHLW approved TABRECTA for METex14 mutation-positive advanced and/or recurrent unresectable NSCLC. In April 2022, we and Novartis announced a positive opinion from the CHMP based on data from the Phase II GEOMETRY mono-1 study showing an overall response rate (ORR) of 51.6% in a cohort evaluating second-line patients only and 44% in all previously-treated patients with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring alterations leading to MET exon 14 skipping.In June 2022, we and Novartis announced the European Commission approval of capmatinib as TABRECTA as monotherapy treatment of adults with advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring alterations leading to mesenchymal-epithelial-transition factor gene (MET) exon 14 (METex14) skipping who require systemic therapy following prior treatment with immunotherapy and/or platinum-based chemotherapy.NSCLC is the most common type of lung cancer, impacting more than 2 million people per year globally. Approximately 3-4 percent of all patients with NSCLC have tumors with a mutation that leads to MET exon 14 skipping. Though rare, this mutation is an indicator of especially poor prognosis and poor responses to standard therapies, including immunotherapy.
Graft-versus-host disease. In March 2022, we and Novartis announced a positive opinion from the CHMP for ruxolitinib in acute and chronic GVHD, based on data from the Phase III REACH2 and REACH3 trials. GVHD is a life-threatening complication of stem cell transplants, with no established standard of care in Europe for patients who do not adequately respond to first-line steroid treatment. In May 2022, we and Novartis announced the EC approval of ruxolitinib as JAKAVI for the treatment of acute or chronic GVHD in patients aged 12 years and older who have inadequate response to corticosteroids or other systemic therapies.
1. baricitinib licensed to Lilly.
2. capmatinib licensed to Novartis.3. ruxolitinib licensed to Novartis ex-US for use in hematology and oncology excluding topical administration.
We establish business relationships, including collaborative arrangements with other companies and medical research institutions to assist in the clinical development and/or commercialization of certain of our drugs and drug candidates and to provide support for our research programs. We also evaluate opportunities for acquiring products or rights to products and technologies that are complementary to our business from other companies and medical research institutions.Below is a brief description of our significant business relationships and collaborations and related license agreements that expand our pipeline and provide us with certain rights to existing and potential new products and technologies. Additional information regarding our collaboration agreements, including their financial and accounting impact on our business and results of operations, can be found in Note 7 of notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Item 8 of this report.
In November 2009, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement with Novartis. Under the terms of the agreement, Novartis received exclusive development and commercialization rights outside of the United States to ruxolitinib and certain back up compounds for hematologic and oncology indications, including all hematological malignancies, solid tumors and myeloproliferative diseases. We retained exclusive development and commercialization rights to JAKAFI (ruxolitinib) in the United States and in certain other indications. Novartis also received worldwide exclusive development and commercialization rights to our MET inhibitor compound capmatinib and certain back up compounds in all indications. We retained options to co-develop and to co-promote capmatinib in the United States. In April 2016, we amended this agreement to provide that Novartis has exclusive research, development and commercialization rights outside of the United States to ruxolitinib (excluding topical formulations) in the GVHD field.
In December 2009, we entered into a License, Development and Commercialization Agreement with Lilly. Under the terms of the agreement, Lilly received exclusive worldwide development and commercialization rights to baricitinib and certain back up compounds for inflammatory and autoimmune diseases. In March 2016, we entered into an amendment to the agreement with Lilly that allows us to engage in the development and commercialization of ruxolitinib in the GVHD field. In May 2020, we amended our agreement with Lilly to enable Lilly to commercialize baricitinib for the treatment of COVID-19.
In December 2018, we entered into a Research Collaboration and Licensing Agreement with Innovent Biologics, Inc. Under the terms of this agreement, Innovent received exclusive development and commercialization rights to pemigatinib and our clinical-stage product candidate parsaclisib in hematology and oncology indications in mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.
In August 2021, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement with a subsidiary of InnoCare Pharma Limited. Under the terms of this agreement, InnoCare’s subsidiary received development and exclusive commercialization rights to tafasitamab in hematology and oncology in mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan.
In April 2022, we entered into a Strategic Alliance Agreement with Maruho Co., Ltd. Under the terms of this agreement, Maruho received development, manufacturing and exclusive commercialization rights to ruxolitinib cream, and other potential future topical formulations of ruxolitinib, in autoimmune and inflammatory dermatologic diseases in Japan.
In December 2022, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement with CMS Aesthetics Limited, a subsidiary of China Medical System Holdings Limited. Under the terms of the agreement, CMS received an exclusive license to develop and commercialize, and a non-exclusive license to manufacture, ruxolitinib cream, and potentially other future topical formulations of ruxolitinib, in autoimmune and inflammatory dermatologic diseases, including vitiligo and atopic dermatitis, for patients in mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau, Taiwan and Southeast Asia.
In January 2015, we entered into a License, Development and Commercialization Agreement with Agenus Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiary, 4-Antibody AG (now known as Agenus Switzerland Inc.), which we collectively refer to as Agenus. Under this agreement, the parties have agreed to collaborate on the discovery of novel immuno-therapeutics using Agenus’ antibody discovery platforms.
In December 2016, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement with Merus. Under this agreement, which became effective in January 2017, the parties have agreed to collaborate with respect to the research, discovery and development of bispecific antibodies utilizing Merus’ technology platform. The collaboration encompasses up to eleven independent programs. In January 2022, we decided to opt-out of the continued development of MCLA-145, a bispecific antibody targeting PD-L1 and CD137. We continue to collaborate with Merus and leverage the Merus platform to develop a pipeline of novel agents, as we continue to hold worldwide exclusive development and commercialization rights to up to ten additional programs.
In October 2017, we entered into a Global Collaboration and License Agreement with MacroGenics. Under this agreement, we received exclusive development and commercialization rights worldwide to MacroGenics’ INCMGA0012, an investigational monoclonal antibody that inhibits PD-1. MacroGenics has retained the right to develop and commercialize, at its cost and expense, its pipeline assets in combination with INCMGA0012.
In January 2018, we entered into a Target Discovery, Research Collaboration and Option Agreement with Syros Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Under this agreement, Syros will use its proprietary gene control platform to identify novel therapeutic targets with a focus in myeloproliferative neoplasms and we have received options to obtain exclusive worldwide rights to intellectual property resulting from the collaboration for up to seven validated targets. We will have exclusive worldwide rights to develop and commercialize any therapies under the collaboration that modulate those validated targets.
In January 2020, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement with MorphoSys AG and MorphoSys US Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of MorphoSys AG, covering the worldwide development and commercialization of MOR208 (tafasitamab), an investigational Fc engineered monoclonal antibody directed against the target molecule CD19. Under the terms of this agreement, we received exclusive commercialization rights outside of the United States, and MorphoSys and we have co-commercialization rights in the United States, with respect to tafasitamab.
In September 2021, we entered into a Collaboration and License Agreement with Syndax covering the worldwide development and commercialization of SNDX-6352 (axatilimab), Syndax’s anti-CSF-1R monoclonal antibody. In March 2021, axatilimab was granted Orphan Drug Designation by the FDA for the treatment of chronic GVHD and a second designation in April 2021 for treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Under the terms of this agreement, we received exclusive commercialization rights outside of the United States, and Syndax has co-commercialization rights in the United States with respect to axatilimab.
The preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.For a discussion of our critical accounting policies, refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our 2022 Form 10-K. There have been no significant changes to our critical accounting policies or estimates during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
There were no new accounting pronouncements issued nor adopted since our filing of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, which could have a significant effect on our condensed consolidated financial statements.
We recorded net income of $21.7 million and basic and diluted net income per share of $0.10 for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to net income of $38.0 million and basic and diluted net income per share of $0.17 in the corresponding period in 2022.
The increase in JAKAFI net product revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the corresponding period in 2022 was comprised of a volume increase of $26.1 million and a price increase of $9.4 million. The JAKAFI net product revenues increase was primarily driven by growth in patient demand across all indications and was partially offset by higher gross-to-net deductions for Medicare and commercial co-pay assistance consistent with historical prior year’s first quarters, as well as an increase in the volume of JAKAFI sold at discounted prices under the federal 340B drug pricing program. The quarter was also impacted by lower weeks on hand channel inventory than normal due to timing of certain customer purchases. The increase in OPZELURA net product revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by increased patient demand and expanded coverage. OPZELURA net product revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were negatively impacted by an increase in co-pay assistance due to higher commercial patient deductibles at the beginning of the plan year and higher Medicaid utilization volume. In addition, OPZELURA volume was negatively impacted by an acceleration of refills in December 2022 driven by patient demand in advance of annual deductible reset or health plan changes. Our product revenues may fluctuate from quarter to quarter due to our customers’ purchasing patterns over the course of the year, including as a result of increased inventory building by customers in advance of expected or announced price increases. Product revenues are recorded net of estimated product returns, pricing discounts including rebates offered pursuant to mandatory federal and state government programs and chargebacks, prompt pay discounts and distribution fees and co-pay assistance. Our revenue recognition policies require estimates of the aforementioned sales allowances each period. The following table provides a summary of activity with respect to our sales allowances and accruals (in thousands):
Government rebates and chargebacks are the most significant component of our sales allowances. Increases in certain government reimbursement rates are limited to a measure of inflation, and when the price of a drug increases faster than this measure of inflation it will result in a penalty adjustment factor that causes a larger sales allowance to those government related entities. We expect government rebates and chargebacks as a percentage of our gross product sales will continue to increase in connection with any future product price increases greater than the rate of inflation, and any such increase in these government rebates and chargebacks will have a negative impact on our reported product revenues, net. We adjust our estimates for government rebates and chargebacks based on new information regarding actual rebates as it becomes available. Claims by third-party payors for rebates and chargebacks are frequently submitted after the period in which the related sales occurred, which may result in adjustments to prior period accrual balances in the period in which the new information becomes available. Our company-sponsored patient savings program in which we provide financial assistance to enable commercially-insured patients to afford their insurance premium and co-pays may fluctuate as the commercial insurance landscape evolves and may impact net revenues, particularly for drugs like OPZELURA. We also adjust our allowance for product returns based on new information regarding actual returns as it becomes available. We expect our sales allowances to fluctuate from quarter to quarter as a result of the Medicare Part D Coverage Gap, the volume of purchases eligible for government mandated discounts and rebates as well as changes in discount percentages which are impacted by potential future price increases, rate of inflation, and other factors.Product royalty revenues on commercial sales of JAKAVI and TABRECTA by Novartis are based on net sales of licensed products in licensed territories as provided by Novartis. Product royalty revenues on commercial sales of OLUMIANT by Lilly are based on net sales of licensed products in licensed territories as provided by Lilly. JAKAVI and OLUMIANT product royalty revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the corresponding period in 2022 were impacted by unfavorable changes in foreign currency exchange rates, while OLUMIANT product royalty revenues were also impacted by a decrease in net product sales of OLUMIANT for use as a treatment for COVID-19. Product royalty revenues on commercial sales of PEMAZYRE by Innovent are based on net sales of licensed products in licensed territories as provided by Innovent.
Cost of product revenues includes all product related costs, reserves for obsolescence, employee personnel costs, including stock compensation, for those employees dedicated to the production of our commercial products, royalties under our collaborative agreements and amortization of our licensed intellectual property rights for ICLUSIG. The increase in cost of product revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same periods in 2022 was primarily due to product related costs for our commercial products including OPZELURA.
We account for research and development costs by natural expense line and not costs by project. The increase in salary and benefits related expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the corresponding periods in 2022 was due primarily to increased development headcount to sustain our development pipeline. Stock compensation expense may fluctuate from period to period based on the number of awards granted, stock price volatility and expected award lives, as well as expected award forfeiture rates which are used to value equity-based compensation. The increase in clinical research and outside services expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the corresponding period in 2022 was primarily due to continued investment in our late stage development assets and the timing of certain expenses. Research and development expenses include upfront and milestone expenses related to our collaborative agreements of $2.7 million and $20.0 million, respectively, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. Research and development expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were net of $0.6 million and $10.3 million, respectively, of costs reimbursed by our collaborative partners. In addition to one-time expenses resulting from upfront fees in connection with the entry into any new or amended collaboration agreements and payment of milestones under those agreements, research and development expenses may fluctuate from period to period depending upon the stage of certain projects and the level of preclinical and clinical trial related activities. Many factors can affect the cost and timing of our clinical trials, including requests by regulatory agencies for more information, inconclusive results requiring additional clinical trials, slow patient enrollment, adverse side effects among patients, insufficient supplies for our clinical trials, timing of drug supply, including API, and real or perceived lack of effectiveness or safety of our investigational drugs in our clinical trials. In addition, the development of all of our products will be subject to extensive governmental regulation. These factors make it difficult for us to predict the timing and costs of the further development and approval of our products.
The increase in salary and benefits related expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the corresponding period in 2022 was due primarily to increased headcount. This increased headcount was due primarily to the establishment of our dermatology commercial organization. Stock compensation expense may fluctuate from period to period based on the number of awards granted, stock price volatility and expected award lives, as well as expected award forfeiture rates which are used to value equity-based compensation. The increase in other contract services and outside costs for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the corresponding periods in 2022, was primarily due to expenses related to promotional activities to support the launch of OPZELURA for the treatments of atopic dermatitis and vitiligo, and timing of certain expenses.
Acquisition-related contingent consideration, which consists of our future royalty obligations to ARIAD/Takeda, was recorded on the acquisition date, June 1, 2016, at the estimated fair value of the obligation, in accordance with the acquisition method of accounting. The fair value of the acquisition-related contingent consideration is remeasured quarterly. The loss on change in fair value of the acquisition-related contingent consideration for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $6.2 million and $6.4 million, respectively, which is recorded in loss on change in fair value of acquisition-related contingent consideration on the condensed consolidated statements of operations. The loss on change in fair value of the contingent consideration during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was due primarily to the passage of time.
Under the collaboration and license agreement with MorphoSys, which was executed in March 2020, we and MorphoSys are both responsible for the commercialization efforts of tafasitamab in the United States and will share equally the profits and losses from the co-commercialization efforts. Our 50% share of the United States profit or loss for the commercialization of tafasitamab for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was a profit of $1.4 million, and was a $4.7 million loss for the three months ended March 31, 2022, and is recorded as (profit) and loss sharing under collaboration agreements on the condensed consolidated statement of operations.
Interest income and other, net. Interest income and other, net for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $32.9 million and $1.3 million, respectively. The increase in Interest income and other, net for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily relates to an increase in interest income.Unrealized loss on long term investments. Unrealized gains and losses on long term investments will fluctuate from period to period, based on the change in fair value of the securities we hold in our publicly held collaboration partners. The following table provides a summary of those unrealized losses:
Provision for income taxes. The provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $30.2 million and $32.5 million, respectively. Our effective tax rate for both of the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was higher than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to foreign losses with no associated tax benefit (i.e., full valuation allowance). While the tax expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased marginally as compared to that for the prior year period, the effective tax rate increased as a result of lower U.S. earnings, while unbenefited foreign losses remained flat.
Due to historical net losses, we had an accumulated deficit of $416 million as of March 31, 2023. We have funded our research and development operations through cash received from customers, sales of equity securities, the issuance of convertible notes, and collaborative arrangements. At March 31, 2023, we had available cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $3.1 billion. Our cash and marketable securities balances are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including money market accounts, and U.S. government debt securities. Available cash is invested in accordance with our investment policy’s primary objectives of liquidity, safety of principal and diversity of investments.Net cash used in operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $105.6 million and net cash provided by operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was $215.7 million. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was due primarily to changes in working capital due to a reduction of our accounts payable balance at March 31, 2023.Our investing activities, other than purchases, sales and maturities of marketable securities, have consisted predominantly of capital expenditures and purchases of long term investments. Net cash used in investing activities was $28.6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, which represented purchases of marketable securities of $54.9 million, payments for intangible assets of $15.0 million, and capital expenditures of $11.9 million, offset in part by the sale and maturities of marketable securities of $53.2 million. Net cash used in investing activities was $16.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022, which represented capital expenditures of $17.0 million, offset in part by the sales and maturities of marketable securities of $0.3 million. In the future, net cash used by investing activities may fluctuate significantly from period to period due to the timing of strategic equity investments, acquisitions, and capital expenditures and maturities/sales and purchases of marketable securities.Net cash provided by financing activities was $4.0 million and $0.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, primarily representing proceeds from the issuance of common stock under our stock plans, offset in part by cash paid to ARIAD/Takeda for contingent consideration. In October 2019, we entered into an agreement with Wilmington Friends School Inc., to purchase property for $50.0 million to expand our global headquarters. Under that agreement, closing of the purchase is subject to certain standard closing conditions, including an initial diligence period and a subsequent approval period. In August 2021, we entered into a $500.0 million, three-year senior unsecured revolving credit facility. We may increase the maximum revolving commitments or add one or more incremental term loan facilities, subject to obtaining commitments from any participating lenders and certain other conditions, in an amount not to exceed $250.0 million plus a contingent additional amount that is dependent on our pro forma consolidated leverage ratio. As of March 31, 2023, we had no outstanding borrowings and were in compliance with all covenants under this facility.Our U.S. income tax payments will increase significantly in 2023 resulting from the full utilization in 2022 of our research and development and orphan drug tax credit carryforwards generated in prior years. Our U.S. tax liabilities continue to reflect the adverse impacts of the mandatory capitalization and amortization of research and development expenses as required under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which eliminated the immediate expensing of such expenses.We believe that our cash flow from operations, together with our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and funds available under our revolving credit facility, will be adequate to satisfy our capital needs for the foreseeable future. Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including our expenditures in connection with our drug discovery and development programs and commercialization operations; expenditures in connection with litigation or other legal proceedings; costs for future facility requirements; and expenditures for future strategic equity investments or potential acquisitions. We have entered into and may in the future seek to license additional rights relating to technologies or drug development candidates in connection with our drug discovery and development programs. Under these licenses, we may be required to pay upfront fees, milestone payments, and royalties on sales of future products. These contingent future payments are discussed in detail in Note 7 of notes to the condensed consolidated financial statements.To the extent we seek to augment our existing cash resources and cash flow from operations to satisfy our cash requirements for future acquisitions or other strategic purposes, we expect that additional funding can be obtained through equity or debt financings or from other sources. The sale of equity or convertible debt securities in the future may be dilutive to our stockholders, and may provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our holders of common stock. Debt financing arrangements may require us to pledge certain assets or enter into covenants that could restrict our operations or our ability to incur further indebtedness.