
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help you understand The Interpublic Group of Companies, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Company,” “IPG,” “we,” “us” or “our”). MD&A should be read in conjunction with our unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes included in this report and our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 (the “2022 Annual Report”), as well as our other reports and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”). Our 2022 Annual Report includes additional information about our significant accounting policies and practices as well as details about the most significant risks and uncertainties associated with our financial and operating results. Our MD&A includes the following sections:EXECUTIVE SUMMARY provides a discussion about our strategic outlook, factors influencing our business and an overview of our results of operations.RESULTS OF OPERATIONS provides an analysis of the consolidated and segment results of operations for the periods presented.LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES provides an overview of our cash flows, funding requirements, financing and sources of funds, and debt credit ratings.CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES provides an update to the discussion in our 2022 Annual Report of our accounting policies that require critical judgment, assumptions and estimates.RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS, by reference to Note 13 to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements, provides a discussion of certain accounting standards that have been recently adopted or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURE, provides a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measure with the most directly comparable generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”) financial measures and sets forth the reasons we believe that presentation of the non-GAAP financial measure contained therein provides useful information to investors regarding our results of operations and financial condition.
We provide marketing, communications and business transformation services that help marketers and brands succeed in today's digital economy. Combining the power of creativity and technology, our 58,200 employees and operations span all major world markets. Our companies specialize in data, creativity, media, consulting, commerce, behavioral science and communications, producing marketing solutions for clients that range in scale from large global marketers to regional and local clients. Our comprehensive global services help marketers build brands, increase sales of their products and services, and gain market share.Our capabilities span ideation to execution: growth, product and experience design; technology and experience platforms; creative, media and marketing strategy; and campaign, content and channel orchestration. The work we produce for our clients is specific to their unique needs. Our solutions vary from project-based activity involving one agency to long-term, fully integrated campaigns created by multiple IPG agencies working together. Our operations support the strategic position that marketers have access to the best and most appropriate resources within IPG to drive business success, and may access these capabilities from across the IPG network in a seamless model called Open Architecture®. With operations in over 100 countries, we can operate in a single region or deliver global integrated programs.We operate in a media, consumer and technology ecosystem that continues to evolve at a rapid pace. Media channels continue to fragment, and clients face an increasingly complex consumer environment. To stay ahead of these challenges and to achieve our objectives, we have made and continue to make investments in creative, strategic and technology talent in areas including commerce, fast-growth digital marketing channels, high-growth geographic regions and strategic world markets. In addition, we consistently review opportunities within our Company to enhance our operations through acquisitions and strategic alliances and internal programs that encourage client-centric collaboration. As appropriate, we also develop relationships with technology and emerging media companies that are building leading-edge marketing tools that complement our agencies' skill sets and capabilities.
Home to some of the world’s best-known and most innovative communications specialists, IPG global brands include Acxiom, Craft, FCB, FutureBrand, Golin, Huge, Initiative, IPG Health, Jack Morton, Kinesso, MAGNA, Matterkind, McCann, Mediabrands, Mediahub, Momentum, MRM, MullenLowe Group, Octagon, R/GA, UM, Weber Shandwick and more.Our financial goals include competitive organic growth of revenue before billable expenses and expansion of Adjusted EBITA margin, as defined and discussed within the Non-GAAP Financial Measure section of this MD&A, which we expect will further strengthen our balance sheet and total liquidity and increase value to our stakeholders. Accordingly, we remain focused on meeting the evolving needs of our clients while concurrently managing our cost structure. We continually seek greater efficiency in the delivery of our services, focusing on more effective resource utilization, including the productivity of our employees, real estate, information technology and shared services, such as finance, human resources and legal. The improvements we have made and continue to make in our financial reporting and business information systems in recent years allow us more timely and actionable insights from our global operations. Our disciplined approach to our balance sheet and liquidity provides us with a solid financial foundation and financial flexibility to manage and grow our business. We believe that our strategy and execution position us to meet our financial goals and to deliver long-term value to all of our stakeholders.
In contrast to the robust business environment in 2022, the macroeconomic backdrop at the outset of 2023 has been more moderate. The impact of a slowing economy that we began to see toward the end of last year on the more cyclical parts of our business continued to weigh on the first quarter. The principal macroeconomic risks to our performance include the impact of any general economic slowdown or contraction, the extent of inflation of labor costs and potential for labor shortages, inflationary pressures on our clients and their customers, the economic impacts of geopolitical conflict and uncertainty, and the impact of continuing and unpredictable supply chain disruptions across the global economy. See Item 1A, Risk Factors, in our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K.
When we analyze period-to-period changes in our operating performance, we determine the portion of the change that is attributable to changes in foreign currency rates and the net effect of acquisitions and divestitures, and the remainder we call organic change, which indicates how our underlying business performed. We exclude the impact of billable expenses in analyzing our operating performance as the fluctuations from period to period are not indicative of the performance of our underlying businesses and have no impact on our operating income or net income.The change in our operating performance attributable to changes in foreign currency rates is determined by converting the prior-period reported results using the current-period exchange rates and comparing these prior-period adjusted amounts to the prior-period reported results. Although the U.S. Dollar is our reporting currency, a substantial portion of our revenues and expenses are generated in foreign currencies. Therefore, our reported results are affected by fluctuations in the currencies in which we conduct our international businesses. Our exposure is mitigated as the majority of our revenues and expenses in any given market are generally denominated in the same currency. Both positive and negative currency fluctuations against the U.S. Dollar affect our consolidated results of operations, and the magnitude of the foreign currency impact to our operations related to each geographic region depends on the significance and operating performance of the region. Our results during the first three months of 2023 were most adversely impacted by the strength of the U.S. Dollar against the British Pound Sterling, Euro, Argentine Peso and Canadian Dollar.For purposes of analyzing changes in our operating performance attributable to the net effect of acquisitions and divestitures, transactions are treated as if they occurred on the first day of the quarter during which the transaction occurred. During the past few years, we have acquired companies that we believe will enhance our offerings and disposed of businesses that are not consistent with our strategic plan.The metrics that we use to evaluate our financial performance include organic change in revenue before billable expenses as well as the change in certain operating expenses, and the components thereof, expressed as a percentage of consolidated revenue before billable expenses, as well as Adjusted EBITA. These metrics are also used by management to assess the financial performance of our reportable segments, MD&E, IA&C, and SC&E. In certain of our discussions, we analyze revenue before billable expenses by geographic region and by business sector, in which we focus on our top 500 clients, which typically constitute approximately 85% of our annual consolidated revenue before billable expenses.Results for the three months ended March 31, 2023, may not be indicative of the results that may be expected for the fiscal year ending December 31, 2023. The Consolidated Financial Statements and MD&A presented herein reflect the latest estimates and assumptions made by us that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosures as of the date of the consolidated financial statements and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods
presented. We believe we have used reasonable estimates and assumptions to assess the fair values of the Company’s goodwill, long-lived assets and indefinite-lived intangible assets; assessment of the annual effective tax rate; valuation of deferred income taxes and the allowance for expected credit losses on future uncollectible accounts receivable. If actual market conditions vary significantly from those currently projected, these estimates and assumptions could materially change resulting in adjustments to the carrying values of our assets and liabilities.The following table presents a summary of our financial performance for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
1    Adjusted EBITA is a financial measure that is not defined by U.S. GAAP. Adjusted EBITA is calculated as net income available to IPG common stockholders before provision for income taxes, total (expenses) and other income, equity in net (loss) income of unconsolidated affiliates, net income attributable to non-controlling interests and amortization of acquired intangibles. Refer to the “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” section of this MD&A for additional information and for a reconciliation to U.S. GAAP measures.2    For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, results include net restructuring charges of $1.6 and $6.6, respectively. See “Restructuring Charges” in Note 5 to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Total revenue, which includes billable expenses, decreased (1.8)% during the first quarter of 2023. Our organic decrease of revenue before billable expenses was (0.2)% during the first quarter of 2023, compared to a significant organic increase of 11.5% during the first quarter of 2022. The decrease was driven by decreased spending from existing clients in our technology & telecom and retail sectors, partially offset by increased spending from existing clients in our healthcare, financial services and other sectors. During the first quarter of 2023, our Adjusted EBITA margin on revenue before billable expenses decreased to 9.6% from 12.0% in the prior-year period as revenue before billable expenses decreased while our operating expenses, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles, slightly increased. See further discussion below in the “Results of Operations” section.
Our revenue before billable expenses is directly impacted by the retention and spending levels of existing clients and by our ability to win new clients. Most of our expenses are recognized ratably throughout the year and are therefore less seasonal than revenue. Our revenue before billable expenses is typically lowest in the first quarter and highest in the fourth quarter, reflecting the seasonal spending of our clients.
The organic decrease of revenue before billable expenses was (0.2)% during the first quarter of 2023, compared to significant organic increase of 11.5% during the first quarter of 2022. The organic decrease in our domestic market was driven primarily by revenue decreases at our digital project-based offerings and advertising businesses, offset by revenue increases at our media businesses and public relations agencies. In our international markets, the 1.2% organic increase was driven by growth at our media, experiential and advertising businesses and was most notable in the Other region led by the Middle East, as well as the United Kingdom and Latin America regions, partially offset by revenue decreases at our digital project-based offerings across nearly all regions.Refer to the segment discussion later in this MD&A for information on changes in revenue before billable expenses by segment.
Total salaries and related expenses increased 0.8% during the first quarter of 2023 as compared to the prior-year period, primarily driven by an increase in base salaries, benefits and tax as well as an increase in severance expense, offset by a decrease in performance-based employee compensation expense and temporary help expense.
1Includes client service costs, non-pass through production expenses, travel and entertainment, professional fees, spending to support new business activity, telecommunications, office supplies, bad debt expense, adjustments to contingent acquisition obligations, foreign currency losses (gains) and other expenses.Office and other direct expenses increased by 2.1% during the first quarter of 2023 as compared to the prior-year period. The increase in office and other direct expenses was mainly due to increases in travel and entertainment expenses, professional consulting fees and foreign currency losses, partially offset by a decrease in occupancy expense and employment costs.
Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) are primarily the unallocated expenses of our "Corporate and Other" group, as detailed further in the segment discussion later in this MD&A, excluding depreciation and amortization. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, SG&A decreased as compared to the prior-year period, primarily due to decreases in performance-based incentive compensation expense, partially offset by increases in base salaries, benefits and tax and professional consulting fees.
During the first quarter of 2023, depreciation and amortization expenses decreased compared to the prior-year period.
During the first quarter of 2023, restructuring charges decreased compared to the prior-year period and were related to adjustments to our restructuring actions taken in 2020 and 2022.
Net interest expense decreased by $14.0 for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to a year ago, primarily attributable to higher interest rates on net deposits, partially offset by lower net cash balances.Results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 include certain items that are not directly associated with our revenue-producing operations.
Net losses on sales of businesses – During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, the amounts recognized were related to sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets and liabilities, consisting primarily of cash, as held for sale within our MD&E, IA&C, and SC&E reportable segments. The businesses sold and held for sale primarily represent unprofitable, non-strategic agencies which are expected to be sold within the next twelve months.Other - During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the amounts recognized were primarily related to pension and postretirement costs. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the majority of the amounts recognized were primarily related to a cash gain from the sale of an equity investment, partially offset by a non-cash loss related to the deconsolidation of a previously consolidated entity in which we maintain an equity interest.
Our tax rates are affected by many factors, including our worldwide earnings from various countries, changes in legislation and tax characteristics of our income. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our income tax expense was positively impacted by excess tax benefits on employee share-based payments, the majority of which is typically recognized in the first quarter due to the timing of the vesting of awards.For the three months ended March 31, 2022, our income tax expense was positively impacted by excess tax benefits on employee share-based payments, the majority of which is typically recognized in the first quarter due to the timing of the vesting of awards, partially offset by net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale for which we received minimal tax benefit.
Basic earnings per share available to IPG common stockholders for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $0.33 compared to basic earnings per share of $0.40 for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Diluted earnings per share available to IPG common stockholders for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $0.33 compared to diluted earnings per share of $0.40 for the three months ended March 31, 2022.    Basic and diluted earnings per share for the three months ended March 31, 2023 included negative impacts of $0.04 from the amortization of acquired intangibles and $0.01 from net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale.    Basic and diluted earnings per share for the three months ended March 31, 2022 included negative impacts of $0.04 from the amortization of acquired intangibles, $0.01 from restructuring charges and $0.02 from net losses on sales of businesses and the classification of certain assets as held for sale.
As discussed in Note 10 to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements, we have three reportable segments as of March 31, 2023: MD&E, IA&C and SC&E. We also report results for the “Corporate and Other” group.
The organic decrease during the first quarter of 2023 was mainly attributable to decreased spending from existing clients in our technology & telecom and retail sectors, partially offset by increased spending from existing clients in our consumer goods and financial services sectors. The (1.1)% organic decrease during the first quarter of 2023 in our domestic market was attributable to revenue decreases at our digital project-based offerings, partially offset by revenue increases at our media businesses. In our international markets, the organic decrease was primarily driven by revenue decreases at our digital project-based offerings across all regions, partially offset by revenue increases at our media businesses primarily in the United Kingdom and Latin America regions.
Segment EBITA margin decreased during the first quarter of 2023 compared to the prior-year period, as revenue before billable expenses, as discussed above, decreased while our operating expenses, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles increased. The increase in salaries and related expenses, as compared to the prior-year period, was primarily driven by increases in base salaries, benefits and tax as well as an increase in severance expense, partially offset by decreases in performance-based incentive compensation expense and temporary help. Office and other direct expense increased mainly due to increases in travel and entertainment expenses, foreign currency losses, expenses related to company meetings and conferences as well as professional consulting fees, partially offset by a decrease in occupancy expense and employment costs.Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of revenue before billable expenses was 2.7% during the first quarter of 2023, which increased slightly as compared to the prior-year period.
The organic decrease during the first quarter of 2023 was driven by decreased spending from existing clients in our technology & telecom and retail sectors, partially offset by increased spending from existing clients in our healthcare sector. The (2.0)% organic decrease during the first quarter of 2023 in our domestic market was driven by revenue decreases in our advertising businesses. In our international markets, the 1.2% organic increase was driven by growth in our advertising businesses, and was most notable in the Other region led by the Middle East.
Segment EBITA margin decreased during the first quarter of 2023 compared to the prior-year period, as the decrease in revenue before billable expenses, as discussed above, exceeded the overall decrease in our operating expenses, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles. The decrease in salaries and related expenses, as compared to the prior-year period, was primarily driven by decreases in temporary help expense and performance-based incentive expense, partially offset by increases in base salaries, benefits and tax as well as increases in severance expense. Office and other direct expense decreased mainly due to decreases in employment costs, occupancy expense as well as new business development, partially offset by increases in travel and entertainment expenses.Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of revenue before billable expenses was 1.6% during the first quarter of 2023, which increased slightly compared to the prior-year period.
The organic increase during the first quarter of 2023 was mainly attributable to increased spending from existing clients in our healthcare and auto & transportation sectors, partially offset by decreased spending from existing clients in our technology & telecom sector. The organic increase of 2.2% during the first quarter of 2023 in our domestic market was driven by revenue increases at our public relations agencies. In our international markets, the 6.1% organic increase was driven by growth at both our public relations agencies and experiential businesses, and was most notable in the Continental Europe and United Kingdom regions.
Segment EBITA margin decreased during the first quarter of 2023 compared to the prior-year period, as the increase in revenue before billable expenses, as discussed above, was outpaced by the overall increase in our operating expense, excluding billable expenses and amortization of acquired intangibles. The increase in salaries and related expenses, as compared to the prior-year period, was primarily driven by an increase in base salaries, benefits and tax, as well as increases in severance expense and performance-based employee compensation expense. Office and other direct expense increased mainly due to increases in travel and entertainment expenses, partially offset by decreases in occupancy expense.Depreciation and amortization, excluding amortization of acquired intangibles, as a percentage of revenue before billable expenses was 1.2% during the first quarter of 2023, which increased slightly as compared to the prior-year period.
Corporate and Other is primarily comprised of selling, general and administrative expenses including corporate office expenses as well as shared service center and certain other centrally managed expenses that are not fully allocated to operating divisions; salaries, long-term incentives, annual bonuses and other miscellaneous benefits for corporate office employees; professional fees related to internal control compliance, financial statement audits and legal, information technology and other consulting services that are engaged and managed through the corporate office; and rental expense for properties occupied by corporate office employees. A portion of centrally managed expenses is allocated to operating divisions based on a formula that uses the planned revenues of each of the operating units. Amounts allocated also include specific charges for information technology-related projects, which are allocated based on utilization.During the first quarter of 2023, Corporate and Other expenses decreased by $7.0 compared to the prior-year period to $13.9, primarily attributable to a decrease in selling, general and administrative expenses, which is discussed in the Results of Operations section.
The following table summarizes key financial data relating to our liquidity, capital resources and uses of capital.
1Consist primarily of depreciation and amortization of fixed assets and intangible assets, deferred income taxes, amortization of restricted stock and other non-cash compensation, and net losses on sales of businesses.2Reflects changes in accounts receivable, other current assets, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and contract liabilities.
The presentation of the three components of net cash provided by operating activities above reflects the manner in which management views and analyzes this information. Management believes this presentation is useful as it presents cash provided by operating activities separately from the impact of changes in working capital, which is seasonal in nature and is impacted by the timing of media buying on behalf of our clients. Additionally, we view changes in other non-current assets and liabilities separately, as these items are not impacted by the factors described below.Due to the seasonality of our business, we typically use cash from working capital in the first nine months of a year, with the largest impact in the first quarter, and generate cash from working capital in the fourth quarter, driven by the seasonally strong media spending by our clients. Quarterly and annual working capital results are impacted by the fluctuating annual media spending budgets of our clients as well as their changing media spending patterns throughout each year across various countries.The timing of media buying on behalf of our clients across various countries affects our working capital and operating cash flow and can be volatile. In most of our businesses, our agencies enter into commitments to pay production and media costs on behalf of clients. To the extent possible, we pay production and media charges after we have received funds from our clients. The amounts involved, which substantially exceed our revenues, primarily affect the level of accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued liabilities and contract liabilities. Our assets include both cash received and accounts receivable from clients for these pass-through arrangements, while our liabilities include amounts owed on behalf of clients to media and production suppliers. Our accrued liabilities are also affected by the timing of certain other payments. For example, while annual cash incentive awards are accrued throughout the year, they are generally paid during the first quarter of the subsequent year.
Net cash used in operating activities during the first three months of 2023 decreased to $547.6 from $633.6 in the first three months of 2022, primarily attributable to a decrease in working capital usage of $170.2. Working capital use was primarily impacted by the spending levels of our clients, lower accrued incentive payments, and variation in the timing of collections and payments around the reporting period.
Net cash used in investing activities during the first three months of 2023 was $34.7, which was an increase of $5.9 as compared to the first three months of 2022, primarily driven by an increase in acquisitions, net of cash acquired. Payments for capital expenditures increased to $32.9 from $30.7 in the first three months of 2023 and 2022, respectively, primarily attributable to higher spending on computer software, leasehold improvements, and furniture and fixtures, partially offset by lower spending on computer hardware.
Net cash used in financing activities during the first three months of 2023 was $274.3, primarily driven by the payment of common stock dividends of $123.2 and common stock repurchases of $77.8.Net cash used in financing activities during the first three months of 2022 was $210.1, primarily driven by the payment of common stock dividends of $118.3 and common stock repurchases of $63.1.
The effect of foreign exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash included in the unaudited Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows resulted in a net decrease of $9.7 during the first three months of 2023. The decrease was primarily a result of the U.S. Dollar being stronger than several foreign currencies, including the British Pound Sterling as of March 31, 2023 as compared to December 31, 2022.
We expect our cash flow from operations and existing cash and cash equivalents to be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating requirements at a minimum for the next twelve months. We also have a commercial paper program, a committed corporate credit facility, and uncommitted lines of credit to support our operating needs. Borrowings under our commercial paper program are supported by our committed corporate credit agreement. We continue to maintain a disciplined approach to managing liquidity, with flexibility over significant uses of cash, including our capital expenditures, cash used for new acquisitions, our common stock repurchase program and our common stock dividends. From time to time, we evaluate market conditions and financing alternatives for opportunities to raise additional funds or otherwise improve our liquidity profile, enhance our financial flexibility and manage market risk. Our ability to access the capital markets depends on a number of factors, which include those specific to us, such as our credit ratings, and those related to the financial markets, such as the amount or terms of available credit. There can be no guarantee that we would be able to access new sources of liquidity, or continue to access existing sources of liquidity, on commercially reasonable terms, or at all.
Our most significant funding requirements include our operations, non-cancelable operating lease obligations, capital expenditures, acquisitions, common stock dividends, taxes, and debt service. Additionally, we may be required to make payments to minority shareholders in certain subsidiaries if they exercise their options to sell us their equity interests.Notable funding requirements include: •Debt service – As of March 31, 2023, we had outstanding short-term borrowings of $27.7 from our uncommitted lines of credit used primarily to fund short-term working capital needs. The remainder of our debt is primarily long-term, with maturities scheduled from 2024 through 2048.
•Acquisitions – We paid cash of $0.3 for an acquisition completed in the first quarter of 2023. We paid cash of $3.7 in relation to adjustments made to upfront payments related to prior year acquisitions. We paid deferred payments of $1.1 for prior-year acquisitions as well as ownership increases in our consolidated subsidiaries in the first three months of 2023. In addition to potential cash expenditures for new acquisitions, we expect to pay approximately $19.0 over the next twelve months related to all completed acquisitions as of March 31, 2023. We may also be required to pay approximately $5.0 related to redeemable non-controlling interest held by minority shareholders, if exercised, over the next twelve months. We will continue to evaluate strategic opportunities to grow and continue to strengthen our market position, particularly in our digital and marketing services offerings, and to expand our presence in high-growth and key strategic world markets.•Dividends – In the first three months of 2023, we paid a quarterly cash dividend of $0.310 per share on our common stock, which corresponded to an aggregate dividend payment of $123.2. Assuming we pay a quarterly dividend of $0.310 per share, and there is no significant change in the number of outstanding shares as of March 31, 2023, we would expect to pay approximately $479.0 over the next twelve months. Whether to declare and the amount of any such future dividend is at the discretion of our Board of Directors (the "Board") and will depend upon factors such as our earnings, financial position and cash requirements.
In February 2022, our Board reauthorized a program to repurchase, from time to time, up to $400.0 of our common stock. In February 2023, the Board authorized a share repurchase program to repurchase from time to time up to $350.0, excluding fees, of our common stock, which was in addition to any amounts remaining under the 2022 share repurchase program. As of March 31, 2023, $352.4, excluding fees, remains available for repurchase under the reauthorized share repurchase programs. We may effect such repurchases through open market purchases, trading plans established in accordance with U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC") rules, derivative transactions or other means. There are no expiration dates associated with these share repurchase programs.
Substantially all of our operating cash flow is generated by our agencies. Our cash balances are held in numerous jurisdictions throughout the world, including at the holding company level. Below is a summary of our sources of liquidity.
We maintain a committed corporate credit facility, originally dated as of July 18, 2008, which has been amended and restated from time to time (the “Credit Agreement”). We use our Credit Agreement to increase our financial flexibility, to provide letters of credit primarily to support obligations of our subsidiaries and to support our commercial paper program. On November 1, 2021, we amended and restated the Credit Agreement. As amended, among other things, the maturity date of the Credit Agreement was extended to November 1, 2026 and the cost structure of the Credit Agreement was changed. The Credit Agreement continues to include a required leverage ratio of not more than 3.50 to 1.00, among other customary covenants, including limitations on our liens and the liens of our consolidated subsidiaries and limitations on the incurrence of subsidiary debt. At the election of the Company, the leverage ratio may be changed to not more than 4.00 to 1.00 for four consecutive quarters, beginning with the fiscal quarter in which there is an occurrence of one or more acquisitions with an aggregate purchase price of at least $200.0. The Credit Agreement is a revolving facility, under which amounts borrowed by us or any of our subsidiaries designated under the Credit Agreement may be repaid and reborrowed, subject to an aggregate lending limit of $1,500.0, or the equivalent in other currencies. The Company has the ability to increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement from time to time by an additional amount of up to $250.0, provided the Company receives commitments for such increases and satisfies certain other conditions. The aggregate available amount of letters of credit outstanding may decrease or increase, subject to a sublimit of $50.0, or the equivalent in other currencies. Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are unsecured. As of March 31, 2023, there were no borrowings under the Credit Agreement; however, we had $9.4 of letters of credit under the Credit Agreement, which reduced our total availability to $1,490.6.We were in compliance with all of our covenants in the Credit Agreement as of March 31, 2023. Management utilizes Credit Agreement EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, as well as the amounts shown in the table below, calculated as required by the Credit Agreement, in order to assess our compliance with such covenants.
1The leverage ratio is defined as debt as of the last day of such fiscal quarter to EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreement) for the four quarters then ended. 2Includes adjustments of the following items from our Consolidated Statements of Operations: provision for income taxes, total (expenses) and other income, equity in net (loss) income of unconsolidated affiliates, and net income attributable to non-controlling interests.
We also have uncommitted lines of credit with various banks that permit borrowings at variable interest rates and that are primarily used to fund working capital needs. We have guaranteed the repayment of some of these borrowings made by certain subsidiaries. If we lose access to these credit lines, we would have to provide funding directly to some of our operations. As of March 31, 2023, the Company had uncommitted lines of credit in an aggregate amount of $869.4, under which we had outstanding borrowings of $27.7 classified as short-term borrowings on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. The average amount outstanding during the first quarter of 2023 was $51.5 with weighted-average interest rate of approximately 4.3%.
The Company is authorized to issue unsecured commercial paper up to a maximum aggregate amount outstanding at any time of $1,500.0. Borrowings under the program are supported by the Credit Agreement described above. Proceeds of the commercial paper are used for working capital and general corporate purposes, including the repayment of maturing indebtedness and other short-term liquidity needs. The maturities of the commercial paper vary but may not exceed 397 days from the date of issue. During the first quarter of 2023, there was no commercial paper activity, and as of March 31, 2023, there was no commercial paper outstanding.
We aggregate our domestic cash position on a daily basis. Outside the United States, we use cash pooling arrangements with banks to help manage our liquidity requirements. In these pooling arrangements, several IPG agencies agree with a single bank that the cash balances of any of the agencies with the bank will be subject to a full right of set-off against amounts other agencies owe the bank, and the bank provides for overdrafts as long as the net balance for all agencies does not exceed an agreed-upon level. Typically, each agency pays interest on outstanding overdrafts and receives interest on cash balances. Our unaudited Consolidated Balance Sheets reflect cash, net of bank overdrafts, under all of our pooling arrangements, and as of March 31, 2023, the amount netted was $2,517.9.
Our debt credit ratings as of April 18, 2023, are listed below.
A credit rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning credit rating agency. The rating of each credit rating agency should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Credit ratings could have an impact on liquidity, either adverse or favorable, because, among other things, they
could affect funding costs in the capital markets or otherwise. For example, our Credit Agreement fees and borrowing rates are based on a credit ratings grid, and our access to the commercial paper market is contingent on our maintenance of sufficient short-term debt ratings.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for the year ended December 31, 2022, included in our 2022 Annual Report. As summarized in Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in our 2022 Annual Report, we believe that certain of these policies are critical because they are important to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to estimate the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These critical estimates relate to revenue recognition, income taxes, goodwill and other intangible assets, and pension and postretirement benefits. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be relevant under the circumstances. Estimation methodologies are applied consistently from year to year, and there have been no significant changes in the application of critical accounting estimates since December 31, 2022, other than as noted below. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
See Note 13 to the unaudited Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on certain accounting standards that have been recently adopted or that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.
This MD&A includes both financial measures in accordance with U.S. GAAP, as well as a non-GAAP financial measure. The non-GAAP financial measure represents Net Income Available to IPG Common Stockholders before Provision for Income Taxes, Total (Expenses) and Other Income, Equity in Net (Loss) Income of Unconsolidated Affiliates, Net Income Attributable to Non-controlling Interests and Amortization of Acquired Intangibles, which we refer to as “Adjusted EBITA”. Adjusted EBITA should be viewed as supplemental to, and not as an alternative for, Net Income Available to IPG Common Stockholders calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP (“net income”) or operating income calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP (“operating income”). This section also includes reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures, as presented below.Adjusted EBITA is used by our management as an additional measure of our Company’s performance for purposes of business decision-making, including developing budgets, managing expenditures and evaluating potential acquisitions or divestitures. Period-to-period comparisons of Adjusted EBITA help our management identify additional trends in our Company’s financial results that may not be shown solely by period-to-period comparisons of net income or operating income. In addition, we use Adjusted EBITA in the incentive compensation programs applicable to some of our employees in order to evaluate our Company’s performance. Our management recognizes that Adjusted EBITA has inherent limitations because of the excluded items, particularly those items that are recurring in nature. Management also reviews operating income and net income as well as the specific items that are excluded from Adjusted EBITA, but included in net income or operating income, as well as trends in those items. The amounts of those items are set forth, for the applicable periods, in the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITA to net income that accompany our disclosure documents containing non-GAAP financial measures, including the reconciliations contained in this MD&A.We believe that the presentation of Adjusted EBITA is useful to investors in their analysis of our results for reasons similar to the reasons why our management finds it useful and because it helps facilitate investor understanding of decisions made by management in light of the performance metrics used in making those decisions. In addition, as more fully described below, we believe that providing Adjusted EBITA, together with a reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to net income, helps investors make comparisons between our Company and other companies that may have different capital structures, different effective income tax rates and tax attributes, different capitalized asset values and/or different forms of employee compensation. However, Adjusted EBITA is intended to provide a supplemental way of comparing our Company with other public companies and is not intended as a substitute for comparisons based on net income or operating income. In making any comparisons to other companies, investors need to be aware that companies may use different non-GAAP measures to evaluate their financial performance. Investors should pay close attention to the specific definition being used and to the reconciliation between such measures and the corresponding U.S. GAAP measures provided by each company under the applicable rules of the SEC.The following is an explanation of the items excluded by us from Adjusted EBITA but included in net income:•Total (Expenses) and Other Income, Provision for Income Taxes, Equity in Net (Loss) Income of Unconsolidated Affiliates and Net Income Attributable to Non-controlling Interests. We exclude these items (i) because these items are not directly attributable to the performance of our business operations and, accordingly, their exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance and (ii) to assist management and investors in making comparisons to companies with different capital structures. Investors should note that these items will recur in future periods.•Amortization of Acquired Intangibles. Amortization of acquired intangibles is a non-cash expense relating to intangible assets arising from acquisitions that are expensed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related assets. We exclude amortization of acquired intangibles because we believe that (i) the amount of such expenses in any specific period may not directly correlate to the underlying performance of our business operations and (ii) such expenses can vary significantly between periods as a result of new acquisitions and full amortization of previously acquired intangible assets. Accordingly, we believe that this exclusion assists management and investors in making period-to-period comparisons of operating performance. Investors should note that the use of intangible assets contributed to revenue in the periods presented and will contribute to future revenue generation and should also note that such expense may recur in future periods.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income Available to IPG Common Stockholders to Adjusted EBITA for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
1     Calculations include restructuring charges of $1.6 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and $6.6 for the three months ended March 31, 2022, respectively. See Note 5 in Item 1, Financial Statements, for further information.