
We have made statements in this Quarterly Report that constitute "forward-looking statements" as that term is defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and other securities laws. These forward-looking statements concern our current expectations regarding our future results from operations, economic performance, financial condition, goals, strategies, investment objectives, plans and achievements. These forward-looking statements are subject to various known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors, and you should not rely upon them except as statements of our present intentions and of our present expectations, which may or may not occur. When we use words such as "believes", "expects", "anticipates", "estimates", "plans", "intends", "pursue", "will" or similar expressions, we are making forward-looking statements. Although we believe that our forward-looking statements are based on reasonable assumptions, our expected results may not be achieved, and actual results may differ materially from our expectations. In addition, important factors that could cause actual results to differ from expectations include, among others:•our ability or inability to execute our strategic growth plan, including our ability to invest according to plan, grow our businesses (including through joint ventures), incorporate alternative technologies into our offerings, achieve satisfactory returns on new product offerings, continue our revenue management, expand and manage our global operations, complete acquisitions on satisfactory terms, integrate acquired companies efficiently and transition to more sustainable sources of energy;•changes in customer preferences and demand for our storage and information management services, including as a result of the shift from paper and tape storage to alternative technologies that require less physical space;•the impact of our distribution requirements on our ability to execute our business plan;•the costs of complying with and our ability to comply with laws, regulations and customer requirements, including those relating to data privacy and cybersecurity issues, as well as fire and safety and environmental standards;•the impact of attacks on our internal information technology ("IT") systems, including the impact of such incidents on our reputation and ability to compete and any litigation or disputes that may arise in connection with such incidents; •our ability to fund capital expenditures;•our ability to remain qualified for taxation as a real estate investment trust for United States federal income tax purposes ("REIT"); •changes in the political and economic environments in the countries in which we operate and changes in the global political climate;•our ability to raise debt or equity capital and changes in the cost of our debt;•our ability to comply with our existing debt obligations and restrictions in our debt instruments;•the impact of service interruptions or equipment damage and the cost of power on our data center operations;•the cost or potential liabilities associated with real estate necessary for our business;•unexpected events, including those resulting from climate change or geopolitical events, could disrupt our operations and adversely affect our reputation and results of operations;•failures to implement and manage new IT systems; •other trends in competitive or economic conditions affecting our financial condition or results of operations not presently contemplated; and•the other risks described in our periodic reports filed with the SEC, including under the caption "Risk Factors" in Part I, Item 1A of our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023.Except as required by law, we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statements appearing in this report.
The following discussions set forth, for the periods indicated, management's discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations. Significant trends and changes are discussed for the three months ended March 31, 2023 within each section.
In September 2022, we announced a global program designed to accelerate the growth of our business ("Project Matterhorn"). Project Matterhorn investments will focus on transforming our operating model to a global operating model. Project Matterhorn will focus on the formation of a solution-based sales approach that is designed to allow us to optimize our shared services and best practices to better serve our customers' needs. We will be investing to accelerate growth and to capture a greater share of the large, global addressable markets in which we operate. We expect to incur approximately $150.0 million in costs annually related to Project Matterhorn from 2023 through 2025. Costs are comprised of (1) restructuring costs, which include (i) site consolidation and other related exit costs, (ii) employee severance costs and (iii) certain professional fees associated with these activities, and (2) other transformation costs, which include professional fees such as project management costs and costs for third party consultants who are assisting in the enablement of our growth initiatives. There were no Restructuring and other transformation costs related to Project Matterhorn for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The following chart presents (in thousands) total Restructuring and other transformation costs related to Project Matterhorn from the inception of Project Matterhorn through March 31, 2023 and for the three months ended March 31, 2023:
•We have experienced steady volume in our Global RIM Business segment, with organic storage rental revenue growth driven primarily by revenue management. We expect organic storage rental revenue growth to benefit from revenue management and volume to be relatively stable in the near term.•Our organic service revenue growth is primarily due to increases in our service activity. We expect organic service revenue growth in 2023 to benefit from our new and existing digital offerings, as well as our traditional services.•We expect continued total revenue and Adjusted EBITDA growth in 2023 as a result of our focus on new product and service offerings, innovation, customer solutions and market expansion in line with our Project Matterhorn objectives.•In the near-term, we expect the impact of a stronger US dollar to create headwinds on reported total revenue and Adjusted EBITDA growth in 2023 against prior periods.Cost of sales (excluding depreciation and amortization) and Selling, general and administrative expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 consists of the following:
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest expense, net, provision (benefit) for income taxes, depreciation and amortization (inclusive of our share of Adjusted EBITDA from our unconsolidated joint ventures), and excluding certain items we do not believe to be indicative of our core operating results, specifically:
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is calculated by dividing Adjusted EBITDA by total revenues. We also show Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin for each of our reportable segments under "Results of Operations – Segment Analysis" below.
Adjusted EBITDA excludes both interest expense, net and the provision (benefit) for income taxes. These expenses are associated with our capitalization and tax structures, which we do not consider when evaluating the operating profitability of our core operations. Adjusted EBITDA does not include depreciation and amortization expenses, in order to eliminate the impact of capital investments, which we evaluate by comparing capital expenditures to incremental revenue generated and as a percentage of total revenues. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for, other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"), such as operating income, net income (loss) or cash flows from operating activities.
(1)Represent operating expenditures directly associated with the closing and integration activities of our business acquisitions that have closed, or are highly probable of closing, and include (i) advisory, legal and professional fees to complete business acquisitions and (ii) costs to integrate acquired businesses into our existing operations, including move, severance and system integration costs (collectively, "Acquisition and Integration Costs").
We define Adjusted EPS as reported earnings per share fully diluted from net income (loss) attributable to Iron Mountain Incorporated (inclusive of our share of adjusted losses (gains) from our unconsolidated joint ventures) and excluding certain items, specifically:
We do not believe these excluded items to be indicative of our ongoing operating results, and they are not considered when we are forecasting our future results. We believe Adjusted EPS is of value to our current and potential investors when comparing our results from past, present and future periods.
(1)The difference between our effective tax rates and our structural tax rate (or adjusted effective tax rates) for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 is primarily due to (i) the reconciling items above, which impact our reported net income (loss) before provision (benefit) for income taxes but have an insignificant impact on our reported provision (benefit) for income taxes and (ii) other discrete tax items. Our structural tax rate for purposes of the calculation of Adjusted EPS for  the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was 15.2% and 18.6%, respectively. (2)Columns may not foot due to rounding.
Funds from operations ("FFO") is defined by the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts as net income (loss) excluding depreciation on real estate assets, losses and gains on sale of real estate, net of tax, and amortization of data center leased-based intangibles ("FFO (Nareit)"). We calculate our FFO measures, including FFO (Nareit), adjusting for our share of reconciling items from our unconsolidated joint ventures. FFO (Nareit) does not give effect to real estate depreciation because these amounts are computed, under GAAP, to allocate the cost of a property over its useful life. Because values for well-maintained real estate assets have historically increased or decreased based upon prevailing market conditions, we believe that FFO (Nareit) provides investors with a clearer view of our operating performance. Our most directly comparable GAAP measure to FFO (Nareit) is net income (loss).We modify FFO (Nareit), as is common among REITs seeking to provide financial measures that most meaningfully reflect their particular business ("FFO (Normalized)"). Our definition of FFO (Normalized) excludes certain items included in FFO (Nareit) that we believe are not indicative of our core operating results, specifically:
(1)Includes foreign currency transaction (gains) losses, net and other, net. See Note 2.k. to Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Quarterly Report for additional information regarding the components of Other expense (income), net.(2)Represents the tax impact of (i) the reconciling items above, which impact our reported net income (loss) before provision (benefit) for income taxes and (ii) other discrete tax items. Discrete tax items resulted in a (benefit) provision for income taxes of $(0.4) million and $(10.0) million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and for the period then ended. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate the estimates used. We base our estimates on historical experience, actuarial estimates, current conditions and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Our critical accounting estimates include the following, which are listed in no particular order:
Further detail regarding our critical accounting estimates can be found in "Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report, and the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes included therein. We have determined that no material changes concerning our critical accounting estimates have occurred since December 31, 2022.
(1)See "Non-GAAP Measures—Adjusted EBITDA" in this Quarterly Report for the definitions of Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin, reconciliation of Net Income (Loss) to Adjusted EBITDA and a discussion of why we believe these non-GAAP measures provide relevant and useful information to our current and potential investors.
Total revenues consist of the following (in thousands):
(1)Constant currency growth rates, which are a non-GAAP measure, are calculated by translating the 2022 results at the 2023 average exchange rates.(2)Our organic revenue growth rate, which is a non-GAAP measure, represents the year-over-year growth rate of our revenues excluding the impact of business acquisitions, divestitures and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations. Our organic revenue growth rate includes the impact of acquisitions of customer relationships.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the increase in reported revenue was primarily driven by organic storage rental revenue growth and organic service revenue growth. Foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations decreased our reported revenue growth rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 by 2.2% compared to the prior year period.
Primary factors influencing the change in reported storage rental revenue and reported service revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 include the following:
Cost of sales (excluding depreciation and amortization) consists of the following expenses (in thousands):
Primary factors influencing the change in reported Cost of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 include the following:•an increase in labor costs driven by an increase in service activity, primarily within our Global RIM business;•an increase in facilities expenses driven by increases in rent expense, reflecting the impact of our sale-leaseback activity during 2022 and the first three months of 2023, as well as increases in utilities costs;•a decrease in product cost of sales in our asset lifecycle management business as a result of component price declines, partially offset by increased volume; and•a decrease of $12.1 million due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Selling, general and administrative expenses consists of the following expenses (in thousands):
Primary factors influencing the change in reported Selling, general and administrative expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 include the following:•an increase in general, administrative and other expenses, driven higher wages and benefits, employee-related costs and information technology costs, partially offset by lower professional fees;•an increase in sales, marketing and account management expenses, driven by higher compensation expense, primarily reflecting increased headcount; and•a decrease of $6.7 million due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations.
Depreciation expense decreased by $0.3 million, or 0.3%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the prior year period. See Note 2.i. to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in our Annual Report for additional information regarding the useful lives over which our property, plant and equipment is depreciated.Amortization expense decreased by $1.2 million, or 1.9%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the prior year period.
Acquisition and Integration Costs for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were approximately $1.6 million and $15.7 million, respectively.
Restructuring and other transformation costs for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $36.9 million and related to operating expenses associated with the implementation of Project Matterhorn. There were no Restructuring and other transformation costs related to Project Matterhorn for the three months ended March 31, 2022.
Gain on disposal/write-down of property, plant and equipment, net for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was approximately $13.1 million. The gains primarily consist of a gain of approximately $18.5 million associated with a sale-leaseback transaction of a facility in Singapore.
Interest expense, net increased by $22.8 million to $137.2 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 from $114.4 million in the prior year period. The increase is primarily due to higher average debt outstanding during the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the prior year period as well as an increase in our weighted average interest rate. Our weighted average interest rate, inclusive of the fees associated with our outstanding letters of credit, was 5.3% and 4.4% at March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See Note 6 to Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Quarterly Report for additional information regarding our indebtedness.
Other expense (income), net for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 consists of the following (in thousands):
We provide for income taxes during interim periods based on our estimate of the effective tax rate for the year. Our effective tax rates for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are as follows: THREE MONTHS ENDED MARCH 31,2023(1)2022Effective Tax Rate20.4 %19.5 %(1)The primary reconciling items between the federal statutory tax rate of 21.0% and our overall effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were the benefits derived from the dividends paid deduction and the differences in the tax rates to which our foreign earnings are subject.
The following table reflects the effect of the foregoing factors on our net income (loss) and Adjusted EBITDA (in thousands):
Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 60 basis points compared to the same prior year period driven by improved service revenue trends, revenue management and ongoing cost containment measures, partially offset by lower Adjusted EBITDA Margin in our asset lifecycle management business.↑ INCREASED BY $29.8 MILLION OR 6.9%Adjusted EBITDA
See Note 9 to Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Quarterly Report, for a description of our reportable segments. Previously reported segment information has been restated to conform to the current presentation.
Primary factors influencing the change in revenue and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in our Global RIM Business segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the prior year period include the following:•organic storage rental revenue growth driven by revenue management and volume;•a 0.2% increase in Global RIM volume excluding deconsolidations (also excluding acquisitions, Global RIM volume increased 0.2%);•organic service revenue growth primarily driven by increases in our traditional service activity levels and growth in our Global Digital Solutions business; •a decrease in revenue of $23.2 million due to foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations; and•a 40 basis point decrease in Adjusted EBITDA Margin primarily driven by an increase in compensation and other employee-related costs, partially offset by revenue management.
Primary factors influencing the change in revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin in our Global Data Center Business segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the prior year period include the following: •organic storage rental revenue growth from leases that commenced during the first three months of 2023 and in prior periods and higher pass-through power costs, partially offset by churn of 150 basis points;•an increase in Adjusted EBITDA primarily driven by organic storage rental revenue growth; and•a 180 basis point increase in Adjusted EBITDA Margin reflecting ongoing cost management and a decline in lower margin project revenue, partially offset by higher pass-through power costs.
Primary factors influencing the change in revenue and Adjusted EBITDA in Corporate and Other for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the prior year period include the following: •a decrease in service revenue in our asset lifecycle management business as a result of component price declines, partially offset by increased volume; and•a decrease in Adjusted EBITDA driven by the flow through of service revenue declines in our asset lifecycle management business, partially offset by lower professional fees.
We expect to meet our short-term and long-term cash flow requirements through cash generated from operations, cash on hand, borrowings under our Credit Agreement (as defined below) and proceeds from monetizing a small portion of our total industrial real estate assets, as well as other potential financings (such as the issuance of debt). Our cash flow requirements, both in the near and long term, include, but are not limited to, capital expenditures, the repayment of outstanding debt, shareholder dividends, potential business acquisitions and normal business operation needs.
As disclosed above, in September 2022, we announced Project Matterhorn. We estimate that the implementation of Project Matterhorn will result in costs of approximately $150.0 million per year from 2023 through 2025. Total costs related to Project Matterhorn during the three months ended March 31, 2023 were approximately $36.9 million and are included in Restructuring and other transformation in our Condensed Consolidated Statement of Operations. Total costs from inception of the program to March 31, 2023 were approximately $78.8 million. There were no Restructuring and other transformation costs related to Project Matterhorn for the three months ended March 31, 2022.
The following is a summary of our cash balances and cash flows (in thousands) as of and for the three months ended March 31,
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, net cash flows provided by operating activities increased by $74.3 million compared to the prior year period, primarily due to an increase in cash from working capital of $78.0 million, primarily related to the timing of accrued expenses and collections of accounts receivable, partially offset by a decrease in net income (excluding non-cash charges) of $3.7 million.
Our significant investing activity during the three months ended March 31, 2023 included cash paid for capital expenditures of $265.9 million. Additional details of our capital spending are included in the "Capital Expenditures" section below.
Our significant financing activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023 included: •Net proceeds of $358.7 million primarily associated with borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.•Payment of dividends in the amount of $186.5 million on our common stock.
The following table presents our capital spend for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, organized by the type of the spending as described in our Annual Report (in thousands):
Excluding capital expenditures associated with potential future acquisitions, we expect total capital expenditures of approximately $1,000.0 million for the year ending December 31, 2023. Of this, we expect our capital expenditures for growth investment to be approximately $855.0 million, and our recurring capital expenditures to approach $145.0 million.
On May 4, 2023, we declared a dividend to our stockholders of record as of June 15, 2023 of $0.6185 per share, payable on July 6, 2023.
Financial instruments that potentially subject us to credit risk consist principally of cash and cash equivalents (including money market funds) and accounts receivable. The only significant concentration of liquid investments as of March 31, 2023 is related to cash and cash equivalents held in money mark funds. See Note 2.e. to Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Quarterly Report for information on our money market funds. Long-term debt as of March 31, 2023 is as follows (in thousands):
(1)Collectively, the “Credit Agreement”.(2)Collectively, the "Parent Notes".
As of March 31, 2023, we had outstanding letters of credit totaling $39.8 million, of which $3.9 million reduce our borrowing capacity under the Revolving Credit Facility. The letters of credit expire at various dates between June 2023 and July 2025.
The Credit Agreement, our bond indentures and other agreements governing our indebtedness contain certain restrictive financial and operating covenants, including covenants that restrict our ability to complete acquisitions, pay cash dividends, incur indebtedness, make investments, sell assets and take other specified corporate actions. The covenants do not contain a rating trigger. Therefore, a change in our debt rating would not trigger a default under the Credit Agreement, our bond indentures or other agreements governing our indebtedness. The Credit Agreement requires that we satisfy a net total lease adjusted leverage ratio and a fixed charge coverage ratio on a quarterly basis and our bond indentures require that, among other things, we satisfy a leverage ratio (not lease adjusted) or a fixed charge coverage ratio (not lease adjusted), as a condition to taking actions such as paying dividends and incurring indebtedness.The Credit Agreement uses earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization and rent expense ("EBITDAR") based calculations and the bond indentures use earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") based calculations as the primary measures of financial performance for purposes of calculating leverage and fixed charge coverage ratios. The EBITDAR- and EBITDA-based leverage calculations include our consolidated subsidiaries, other than those we have designated as "Unrestricted Subsidiaries" as defined in the Credit Agreement and bond indentures. Generally, the Credit Agreement and the bond indentures use a trailing four fiscal quarter basis for purposes of the relevant calculations and require certain adjustments and exclusions for purposes of those calculations, which make the calculation of financial performance for purposes of those calculations under the Credit Agreement and bond indentures not directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA as presented herein. These adjustments can be significant. For example, the calculation of financial performance under the Credit Agreement and certain of our bond indentures includes (subject to specified exceptions and caps) adjustments for non-cash charges and for expected benefits associated with (i) completed acquisitions, (ii) certain executed lease agreements associated with our data center business that have yet to commence, and (iii) restructuring and other strategic initiatives. The calculation of financial performance under our other bond indentures includes, for example, adjustments for non-cash charges and for expected benefits associated with (i) completed acquisitions and (ii) events that are extraordinary, unusual or non-recurring.Our leverage and fixed charge coverage ratios under the Credit Agreement as of March 31, 2023 are as follows:
We are in compliance with our leverage and fixed charge coverage ratios under the Credit Agreement, our bond indentures and other agreements governing our indebtedness as of March 31, 2023. Noncompliance with these leverage and fixed charge coverage ratios would have a material adverse effect on our financial condition and liquidity.Our ability to pay interest on or to refinance our indebtedness depends on our future performance, working capital levels and capital structure, which are subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors which may be beyond our control. There can be no assurance that we will generate sufficient cash flow from our operations or that future financings will be available on acceptable terms or in amounts sufficient to enable us to service or refinance our indebtedness or to make necessary capital expenditures.
In November 2022, we entered into a forward-starting interest rate swap agreement to limit our exposure to changes in interest rates on future borrowings under our Virginia Credit Agreement (as defined in Note 7 to Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in our Annual Report). The forward-starting interest rate swap agreement commences in July 2023 and expires in October 2025. As of both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we have $4.8 million in notional value outstanding on this forward-starting interest rate swap agreement. In July 2019, we entered into forward-starting interest rate swap agreements to limit our exposure to changes in interest rates on a portion of our floating rate indebtedness. These forward-starting interest rate swap agreements commenced in March 2022. As of both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we have $350.0 million in notional value outstanding on these interest rate swap agreements, which expire in March 2024.We have designated each of the interest rate swap agreements described above as cash flow hedges. These interest rate swap agreements are marked to market at the end of each reporting period, representing the fair values of the interest rate swap agreements, and any changes in fair value are recognized as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive items, net. Unrealized gains are recognized as assets, while unrealized losses are recognized as liabilities.
We utilize cross-currency interest rate swaps to hedge the variability of exchange rate impacts between the United States dollar and the Euro. As of both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we have approximately $469.2 million in notional value outstanding on cross-currency interest rate swaps with maturity dates ranging from August 2023 through February 2026. We have designated these cross-currency swap agreements as hedges of net investments in certain of our Euro denominated subsidiaries and they require an exchange of the notional amounts at maturity. These cross-currency swap agreements are marked to market at the end of each reporting period, representing the fair values of the cross-currency swap agreements, and any changes in fair value are recognized as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive items, net. Unrealized gains are recognized as assets while unrealized losses are recognized as liabilities. The excluded component of our cross-currency swap agreements is recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive items, net and amortized to interest expense on a straight-line basis.
In April 2021, we closed on an agreement to form a joint venture (the "Web Werks JV") with the shareholders of Web Werks India Private Limited ("Web Werks"), a colocation data center provider in India. Through December 31, 2022, we made two investments totaling approximately 7,500.0 million Indian rupees (or approximately $96.2 million, based upon the exchange rates between the United States dollar and Indian rupee on the closing date of each investment) in exchange for a noncontrolling interest in the form of convertible preference shares in the Web Werks JV. Under the terms of the original Web Werks JV shareholder agreement, we were required to make an additional investment of 3,750.0 million Indian rupees by May 2023. In April 2023, the original Web Werks JV shareholder agreement was amended to extend the period by which the investment is required to be made to May 2024.
The following joint ventures are accounted for as equity method investments and are presented as a component of Other within Other assets, net in our Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. The carrying values and equity interests in our joint ventures at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022 are as follows (in thousands):
Additionally, we have a loan receivable with the Frankfurt JV of approximately $22.8 million, which is included as a component of Other within Other assets, net within our Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheet at March 31, 2023.