
The following discussion is based upon our unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part I, Item 1, of this Report. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations to provide information that will assist the reader in understanding our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting estimates affect our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. To aid in understanding our operating results for the periods covered by this Report, we have provided an executive overview, which includes a summary of our business and market environment along with a financial results and key performance metrics overview and a discussion of material events and uncertainties known to management. These sections should be read in conjunction with the more detailed discussion and analysis of our condensed consolidated financial condition and results of operations in this Item 2, our “Risk Factors” section included in Item 1A of Part II of this Report, and our unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes included in Item 1 of Part I of this Report, as well as our audited Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes included in Item 8 of Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022, or Form 10-K.
Juniper Networks designs, develops, and sells products and services for high-performance networks to enable customers to build scalable, reliable, secure, and cost-effective networks for their businesses, while achieving agility and improved operating efficiency through automation. We sell our solutions in more than 150 countries in three geographic regions: Americas; Europe, Middle East, and Africa, which we refer to as EMEA; and Asia Pacific, which we refer to as APAC. We organize and manage our business by major functional departments on a consolidated basis as one operating segment. Our true north is experience-first networking to help our customers achieve their business outcomes. We sell high-performance networking product offerings within the following customer solution categories: AI-Driven Enterprise, Automated WAN Solutions, and Cloud-Ready Data Center, and our connected security products are sold in each category. •AI-Driven Enterprise encompasses client-to-cloud portfolio, cloud-delivered campus wired and wireless solutions of Mist and EX switches, and our SD-WAN portfolio, which includes 128 Technology and Branch SRX solutions. •Automated WAN Solutions includes MX and PTX product lines, and ACX product line targeting the Metro market. It also includes Paragon Active Assurance, formerly known as Netrounds, which is now part of Paragon Automation, our WAN Automation suite. •Cloud-Ready Data Center includes QFX product line, Apstra and Contrail product lines, along with our high-end security portfolio of SRX, targeting data center security for service provider, cloud, and enterprise. In addition to our product offerings, we offer software-as-a-service ("SaaS"), software subscriptions, and other customer services, including maintenance and support, professional services, and education and training programs.Our products and services address high-performance network requirements for our customers within our verticals: Cloud, Service Provider, and Enterprise who view the network as critical to their success. We believe our silicon, systems, and software represent innovations that transform the economics and experience of networking, helping our customers achieve superior performance, greater choice, and flexibility, while reducing overall total cost of ownership. We are executing against our innovation roadmap as each of our industry verticals transitions to cloud architectures. We focus on compelling and differentiated use cases targeting the AI-Driven Enterprise, Automated WAN Solutions, and Cloud-Ready Data Center solution categories. We believe our understanding of high-performance networking technology and cloud architecture positions us to effectively capitalize on the industry transition to more automated, cost-efficient, and scalable networks.
We have a global supply chain, which is primarily composed of manufacturing partners and component suppliers. Global supply chain constraints in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in disruption to our production schedule due to both constrained manufacturing capacity as well as component parts shortages. These challenges resulted in extended lead times of certain products to our customers, increased logistics costs, and impacted the volume of products we were able to deliver, which negatively impacted our ability to recognize revenue. To meet our customer needs, our supply chain team has been executing on a risk mitigation plan to resolve our challenges and further enhance our supply chain resiliency, including multi-sourcing, pre-ordering components, managing our inventories, transforming our logistics network, prioritizing critical customers, and partnering on solutions while ensuring the safety of our employees, partners, and suppliers.Similar to others, we continue to experience elevated component costs and inventory balances. These have had a negative impact on our gross margin and operating cash flow. We believe some of the strength in previous product orders was attributable to these industry supply chain challenges that were causing certain customers to place orders early in an effort to secure supply when needed, which resulted in significantly elevated backlog1 levels. In the first quarter of 2023, we saw a decline in product orders as buying patterns normalized and customers consumed previously placed orders. We anticipate backlog to remain at elevated levels, but expect it to continue to decline as supply and extended lead times improve. We also expect to see a return to more traditional seasonal ordering patterns on a sequential basis starting in the second quarter of 2023.We believe the extended lead times and increased component and logistic costs will continue to improve during 2023. We took pricing actions in 2022 to mitigate some of the effects of rising component costs and general inflationary pressures arising from supply chain constraints as well as overall macroeconomic conditions, and expect these actions to have a substantial impact in 2023. While the situation is dynamic, we believe that we currently have access to sufficient supplies of semiconductors and other components and will be able to meet our full-year financial forecast. We continue to monitor and evaluate the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations on a regional, national, and global basis. We do not expect the pandemic to have a substantial net impact on our consolidated operating results or our liquidity position. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part II of this Report for further discussion of this risk.1 Backlog consists of confirmed orders for product expected to be shipped to our distributors, resellers, or end-customers within the next twelve months. The following amounts are not included in our backlog: (1) deferred revenue, (2) unbilled contract revenue, (3) all service obligations, including software as a service (SaaS), and (4) certain future revenue adjustments for items such as sales return reserves and early payment discounts.
The following table provides an overview of our financial results and key financial metrics (in millions, except per share amounts, percentages, and days sales outstanding, or DSO):
(*) Includes deferred revenue from hardware solutions, software licenses, software support and maintenance, and SaaS offerings sold in our Automated WAN Solutions, Cloud-Ready Data Center, and AI-Driven Enterprise customer solution categories.•Net Revenues: Net revenues increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to the Enterprise and Service Provider verticals, partially offset by decline in the Cloud vertical. The growth in the Enterprise vertical was driven by the growth in all customer solutions, and the growth in the Service Provider vertical was primarily driven by Automated WAN Solutions and, to a lesser extent, AI-Driven Enterprise. The decline in the Cloud vertical was primarily driven by Automated WAN Solutions. Service net revenues increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to strong sales of software subscriptions.Of our top ten customers for the first quarter of 2023, four were in Cloud, five were in Service Provider, and one was in Enterprise. Of these customers, two were located outside of the U.S.•Gross Margin: Gross margin as a percentage of net revenues increased primarily due to the easing of elevated logistics and other supply chain costs, pricing actions and favorable customer mix•Operating Margin: Operating income as a percentage of net revenues increased primarily due to higher revenue and the drivers described in the gross margin discussion above, partially offset by higher personnel-related expenses driven by an increase in headcount.•Operating Cash Flows: Net cash provided by operations decreased primarily due to higher supplier payments and employee compensation payments, partially offset by higher customer collections.•Capital Return: We continue to return capital to our stockholders. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we repurchased 4.5 million shares of our common stock in the open market at an average price of $31.20 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $140.0 million. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we paid a quarterly dividend of $0.22 per share, for an aggregate amount of $70.6 million.•DSO: DSO is calculated as the ratio of ending accounts receivable, net of allowances, divided by average daily net revenues for the preceding 90 days. DSO increased primarily due to a significant increase in overall invoicing and timing of collections, partially offset by higher revenue.•Deferred Revenue: Total deferred revenue increased as of March 31, 2023, compared to December 31, 2022, primarily driven by the timing of contract renewals.
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions are based on current facts, historical experience, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, there were no material changes to our critical accounting estimates as compared to the critical accounting estimates disclosed in Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contained in Part II, Item 7 of our Form 10-K.
The following table presents net revenues by customer solution, customer vertical, and geographic region (in millions, except percentages):
Total net revenues increased across all customer solutions and geographic regions mainly driven by higher sales volume, and to a lesser extent, list-price modifications that we made in 2022.The AI-Driven Enterprise revenue increased across all verticals.The Automated WAN Solutions revenue increase was primarily driven by Service Provider and Enterprise, partially offset by a decline in Cloud.The Cloud-Ready Data Center revenue increase was primarily driven by Enterprise, partially offset by a decline in Cloud and Service Provider.Also, software and security products and services represent key areas of our strategic focus that are critical components to our business success. Software and related service offerings include revenue from software license, software support and maintenance, and SaaS contracts. Total security offerings include revenue from our complete portfolio of hardware and software security products, including SD-WAN solutions, as well as services related to our security solutions.The following table presents net revenues from software and security products and services (in millions, except percentages):
The following table presents gross margins (in millions, except percentages):
Our gross margins as a percentage of net revenues have been and will continue to be affected by a variety of factors, including general inflationary pressures, the mix and average selling prices of our products and services, new product introductions and enhancements, manufacturing, component and logistics costs, expenses for inventory obsolescence and warranty obligations, cost of support and service personnel, customer mix as we continue to expand our footprint with certain strategic customers, the mix of distribution channels through which our products and services are sold, and import tariffs. For example, our logistics and other supply chain-related costs have increased due to the ongoing global semiconductor shortage. For more information on the supply chain constraints on our business, see the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part II of this Report.
Product gross margin as a percentage of product revenues increased primarily due to the easing of elevated logistics and other supply chain costs, pricing actions and favorable customer mix. We continue to undertake specific efforts to address certain factors impacting our product gross margin. These efforts include performance and quality improvements through engineering to increase value across our products; optimizing our supply chain and service business; pricing management; and increasing software and solution sales.
Service gross margin as a percentage of service net revenues increased primarily due to higher revenue from hardware maintenance and software subscriptions.
The following table presents operating expenses (in millions, except percentages):
Total operating expenses increased primarily due to increases in personnel-related costs driven by higher headcount, partially offset by lower restructuring costs.
The following table presents other expense, net (in millions, except percentages):
N/M - Not meaningfulTotal other expense, net, decreased primarily due to higher interest income and net gain on investments, partially offset by higher interest expense.
The following table presents income tax provision (benefit) (in millions, except percentages):
The effective tax rate increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to the changes in the effect of one-time items. For further explanation of our income tax provision, see Note 11, Income Taxes, in Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of Part I of this Report.Beginning January 1, 2022, as a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ("Tax Act"), all our U.S. and non-U.S. based R&D expenditures are being capitalized and amortized over five and fifteen years, respectively. Absent a change in legislation, we estimate a reduced effective tax rate and incremental cash tax payment of up to $150 million in 2023. The actual impacts will primarily depend on if and when this legislation is deferred, modified, or repealed by the U.S. Congress, including if retroactively, and the amount of R&D expenditures paid or incurred. We estimate the impacts should gradually decrease over the five- and fifteen-year amortization periods.
Liquidity and capital resources may be impacted by our operating activities as well as acquisitions, investments in strategic relationships, repurchases of shares of our common stock, and payment of cash dividends on our common stock. Since the enactment of the Tax Act, we have repatriated a significant amount of cash from outside of the U.S., and plan to continue to repatriate on an ongoing basis. We intend to use the repatriated cash to invest in the business, support value-enhancing mergers and acquisitions, and fund our return of capital to stockholders. Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term, and long-term investments, cash generated from operations together with the revolving credit facility and our ability to access to capital markets will be sufficient to fund our operations, planned stock repurchases and dividends, capital expenditures, purchase commitments and other liquidity requirements, and anticipated growth for at least the next twelve months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. However, our future liquidity and capital requirements may vary materially from those now planned depending on many factors, including, but not limited to, our growth rate, the timing and amount we spend to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products and services, the costs to acquire or invest in businesses and technologies, an increase in manufacturing or component costs, and the risks and uncertainties detailed in the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part II of this Report.The Company's cash requirements have not changed materially since December 31, 2022, as discussed in the Form 10-K, except for purchase commitments with contracts manufacturers and suppliers and potential tax payments pursuant to the Tax Act.
In order to reduce manufacturing lead times and in the interest of having access to adequate component supply, we enter into agreements with contract manufacturers and certain suppliers to procure inventory based on the Company's requirements. A significant portion of the Company's purchase commitments arising from these agreements consist of firm and non-cancelable commitments. In certain instances, these agreements allow the Company the option to cancel, reschedule, and adjust its requirements based on the Company's business needs prior to firm orders being placed. As of March 31, 2023, we had purchase commitments of $2,298.8 million, with $1,940.0 million payable within 12 months.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we made tax payments of approximately $19 million. For the remainder of 2023, we may incur up to $150 million in additional tax payments attributed to the capitalization and amortization requirements for R&D expenditures pursuant to the Tax Act.
We have a capital return program authorized by the Board of Directors (the "Board"). During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we repurchased 4.5 million shares of our common stock in the open market at an average price of $31.20 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $140.0 million under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program.As of March 31, 2023, there was approximately $0.5 billion of authorized funds remaining under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program.Future share repurchases under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program will be subject to a review of the circumstances at that time and will be made from time to time in private transactions or open market purchases as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements. Our 2018 Stock Repurchase Program may be discontinued at any time. See Note 8, Equity, in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of Part I of this Report for further discussion of the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program. In addition, any future dividends, and the establishment of record and payment dates, are subject to approval by the Board or an authorized committee thereof. See Note 14, Subsequent Events, in the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1 of Part I of this Report for discussion of our dividend declaration subsequent to March 31, 2023.