
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is intended to help the reader understand Kellogg Company, our operations and our present business environment. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes thereto contained in Item 1 of this report. Our MD&A references consumption and net sales in discussing our sales trends for certain categories and brands.  We record net sales upon delivery of shipments to our customers.  Consumption and share data noted within is based on Nielsen x-AOC or other comparable source, for the applicable period. Consumption refers to consumer purchases of our products from our customers. Unless otherwise noted, consumption and shipment trends are materially consistent.For more than 115 years, consumers have counted on Kellogg for great-tasting, high-quality and nutritious foods. Currently, these foods include snacks, such as crackers, savory snacks, toaster pastries, cereal bars and bites; and convenience foods, such as, ready-to-eat cereals, frozen waffles, veggie foods and noodles. Kellogg products are manufactured and marketed globally.
During 2022, the Company announced its intent to separate its North American cereal business, via tax-free spin-off, with a target to complete the transaction during the fourth quarter of 2023, resulting in two independent public companies, each better positioned to unlock their full standalone potential.  The proposed separation of the North American cereal business is expected to create greater strategic, operational, and financial focus for the company and its stakeholders, and will build on our current momentum.
The war in Ukraine and the related sanctions imposed have increased global economic and geopolitical uncertainty.  In March 2022, we suspended all new investments and shipments of all products to Russia.  We have no employees or direct operations in Ukraine. Our business in Russia consists of three manufacturing facilities.In December 2022 the Company entered into an agreement to sell our Russian business to a third party, pending a number of local government regulatory approvals. The business is a part of our Europe reportable segment. The pending sale includes the entirety of the Company’s operations in Russia and will result in a complete exit from the market. Although the Company has entered into a definitive agreement to sell its Russian business, there is no assurance that we will obtain the necessary regulatory approvals or that the other terms and conditions to complete the sale will be satisfied or approved.As of April 1, 2023 the pending sale did not meet the criteria for held for sale accounting due to uncertainty related to the evolving regulatory approvals that are required in order to complete the transaction. If approved, the Company expects to incur a loss on the transaction due to the release of historical foreign currency translation adjustments (CTA). The net book value of the assets related to the Russian business was $70 million, which are expected to be recoverable on a held and used basis, and historical CTA losses was $95 million. The net value of assets and CTA losses collectively represent less than 1% of total Company assets as of April 1, 2023. The Kellogg business in Russia represents approximately 1% of consolidated Kellogg Company net sales.Impacts of the war to our net sales, earnings, and cash flows extends beyond our business in Russia.  Regional or global economic recessions, inflation, and supply chain challenges as a result of the war or further escalation could have a material impact on our results.
Events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine have resulted in certain impacts to the global economy, including market disruptions, supply chain challenges, and inflationary pressures.  During the quarter ended April 1, 2023 we continued to experience elevated commodity and supply chain costs, including logistics, procurement, and manufacturing costs.  We continue to mitigate the dollar impact of this input cost inflation through the execution of productivity initiatives and revenue growth management actions. Additionally, from time to time we may enter into a combination of fixed price contracts with suppliers and commodity derivative instruments to manage the impact of volatility in the price of raw materials. We expect these market disruptions and inflationary pressures to continue throughout 2023.
We manage our operations through four operating segments that are based primarily on geographic location – North America which includes the U.S. businesses and Canada; Europe which consists principally of European countries; Latin America which consists of Central and South America and includes Mexico; and AMEA (Asia Middle East Africa) which consists of Africa, Middle East, Australia and other Asian and Pacific markets.  These operating segments also represent our reportable segments.
This filing includes non-GAAP financial measures that we provide to management and investors that exclude certain items that we do not consider part of on-going operations. Items excluded from our non-GAAP financial measures are discussed in the "Significant items impacting comparability" section of this filing. Our management team consistently utilizes a combination of GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate business results, to make decisions regarding the future direction of our business, and for resource allocation decisions, including incentive compensation. As a result, we believe the presentation of both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with increased transparency into financial measures used by our management team and improves investors’ understanding of our underlying operating performance and in their analysis of ongoing operating trends. All historic non-GAAP financial measures have been reconciled with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.  Non-GAAP financial measures used for evaluation of performance include currency-neutral and organic net sales, adjusted and currency-neutral adjusted operating profit, adjusted and currency-neutral adjusted diluted earnings per share (EPS), currency-neutral adjusted gross profit, currency neutral adjusted gross margin, adjusted effective tax rate, net debt, and cash flow. We determine currency-neutral results by dividing or multiplying, as appropriate, the current-period local currency operating results by the currency exchange rates used to translate our financial statements in the comparable prior-year period to determine what the current period U.S. dollar operating results would have been if the currency exchange rate had not changed from the comparable prior-year period. These non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similar measures used by other companies.•Currency-neutral net sales and organic net sales: We adjust the GAAP financial measure to exclude the   impact of foreign currency, resulting in currency-neutral net sales. In addition, we exclude the impact of acquisitions, divestitures, and foreign currency, resulting in organic net sales. We excluded the items which we believe may obscure trends in our underlying net sales performance. By providing these non-GAAP net sales measures, management intends to provide investors with a meaningful, consistent comparison of net sales performance for the Company and each of our reportable segments for the periods presented. Management uses these non-GAAP measures to evaluate the effectiveness of initiatives behind net sales growth, pricing realization, and the impact of mix on our business results. These non-GAAP measures are also used to make decisions regarding the future direction of our business, and for resource allocation decisions. •Adjusted: gross profit, gross margin, operating profit and diluted EPS:  We adjust the GAAP financial measures to exclude the effect of restructuring programs, costs of the planned separation transaction, mark-to-market adjustments for pension plans (service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, and other net periodic pension costs are not excluded), commodity contracts, certain equity investments and certain foreign currency contracts, a gain on interest rate swaps, and other costs impacting comparability resulting in adjusted. We excluded the items which we believe may obscure trends in our underlying profitability. By providing these non-GAAP profitability measures, management intends to provide investors with a meaningful, consistent comparison of the Company's profitability measures for the periods presented. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate the effectiveness of initiatives intended to improve profitability, as well as to evaluate the impacts of inflationary pressures and decisions to invest in new initiatives within each of our segments. •Currency-neutral adjusted: gross profit, gross margin, operating profit, and diluted EPS:  We adjust the GAAP financial measures to exclude the effect of restructuring programs, costs of the planned separation transaction, mark-to-market adjustments for pension plans (service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, and other net periodic pension costs are not excluded), commodity contracts, certain equity investments and certain foreign currency contracts, other costs impacting comparability, and foreign currency, resulting in currency-neutral adjusted. We excluded the items which we believe may obscure trends in our underlying profitability. By providing these non-GAAP profitability measures, management intends to provide investors with a meaningful, consistent comparison of the Company's profitability measures for the periods presented. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate the effectiveness of initiatives intended to improve profitability, as well as to evaluate the impacts of inflationary pressures and decisions to invest in new initiatives within each of our segments. •Adjusted effective income tax rate: We adjust the GAAP financial measures to exclude the effect of restructuring programs, costs of the planned separation transaction, mark-to-market adjustments for pension plans (service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, and other net periodic pension costs are not excluded), commodity contracts, certain equity investments and certain foreign currency contracts, a gain on interest rate swaps, and other costs impacting comparability. We excluded the items which we believe may obscure trends in our pre-tax income and the related tax effect of those items on our adjusted effective income tax rate, and other impacts to tax expense. By providing this non-GAAP measure, management intends to provide investors with a meaningful, consistent comparison of the Company's effective tax rate, excluding the pre-tax income and tax effect of the items noted above, for the periods presented.  Management uses this non-GAAP measure to monitor the effectiveness of initiatives in place to optimize our global tax rate.•Net debt: Defined as the sum of long-term debt, current maturities of long-term debt and notes payable,less cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities. With respect to net debt, cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities are subtracted from the GAAP measure, total debt liabilities, because they could be used to reduce the Company’s debt obligations. Company management and investors use this non-GAAP measure to evaluate changes to the Company's capital structure and credit quality assessment.•Cash flow: Defined as net cash provided by operating activities reduced by expenditures for property additions. Cash flow does not represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures.  We use this non-GAAP financial measure of cash flow to focus management and investors on the amount of cash available for debt repayment, dividend distributions, acquisition opportunities, and share repurchases once all of the Company’s business needs and obligations are met. Additionally, certain performance-based compensation includes a component of this non-GAAP measure.These measures have not been calculated in accordance with GAAP and should not be viewed as a substitute for GAAP reporting measures.
We recognize mark-to-market adjustments for pension and postretirement benefit plans, commodity contracts, and certain foreign currency contracts as incurred. Actuarial gains/losses for pension plans are recognized in the year they occur. Mark-to-market gains/losses for certain equity investments are recorded based on observable price changes. Changes between contract and market prices for commodity contracts and certain foreign currency contracts result in gains/losses that are recognized in the quarter they occur. We recorded a pre-tax mark-to-market loss of $58 million for the quarter ended April 1, 2023.  Additionally, we recorded a pre-tax mark-to-market gain of $68 million for the quarter ended April 2, 2022. Included within the aforementioned was a pre-tax mark-to-market gain for pension plans of $21 million for the quarter ended April 2, 2022.
The Company continues to work towards its planned separation of its North America cereal business. As a result, we incurred pre-tax charges related to the planned separation, primarily related to legal and consulting costs, of $51 million for the quarter ended April 1, 2023.
Costs related to reorganizations in support of our Deploy for Growth priorities and a reshaped portfolio; investments in enhancing capabilities prioritized by our Deploy for Growth strategy; and prospective divestitures and acquisitions. As a result, we incurred pre-tax charges, primarily related to reorganizations, of $1 million for the quarter ended April 1, 2023. We recorded pre-tax charges of $7 million for the quarter ended April 2, 2022.
We evaluate the operating results of our business on a currency-neutral basis.  We determine currency-neutral operating results by dividing or multiplying, as appropriate, the current-period local currency operating results by the currency exchange rates used to translate our financial statements in the comparable prior-year period to determine what the current period U.S. dollar operating results would have been if the currency exchange rate had not changed from the comparable prior-year period.
For the quarter ended April 1, 2023, our reported net sales increased 10% versus the prior year as a result of positive price/mix, sustained momentum in snacks and noodles, as well as a recovery of North America cereal that drove net sales growth which more than offset the impacts of price elasticity, halted shipments into Russia, and unfavorable currency. Organic net sales increased 14% from the prior year excluding foreign currency. First quarter reported operating profit decreased 15% versus the year-ago quarter as net sales growth was more than offset by unfavorable mark-to-market impacts and separation costs. Currency-neutral adjusted operating profit increased 18%, after excluding the impact of mark-to-market, separation costs, and foreign currency translation.         Reported diluted EPS of $0.86 for the quarter decreased 30% compared to the prior year quarter of $1.23 due to  unfavorable mark-to-market impacts, higher interest expense, incremental separation costs, and lower pension income.  Currency-neutral adjusted diluted EPS of $1.13 for the quarter increased 2.7% from the prior year quarter after excluding mark-to-market, separation costs, and foreign currency translation.
For more information on the reconciling items in the table above, please refer to the Significant items impacting comparability section.*Represents the estimated income tax effect on the reconciling items, using weighted-average statutory tax rates, depending upon the applicable jurisdiction.
The following tables provide an analysis of net sales and operating profit performance for the first quarter of 2023 versus 2022:
For more information on the reconciling items in the table above, please refer to the Significant items impacting comparability section.
For more information on the reconciling items in the table above, please refer to the Significant items impacting comparability section.
Reported net sales for the first quarter increased 13% versus the prior year due to inflation-driven price realization and a mix shift toward snacks, and featuring sustained momentum in snacks and continued recovery in North America cereal.    North America snacks net sales increased 15% due to both volume and price/mix growth, led by double-digit consumption growth of our Rice Krispies Treats, Pringles, Club, and Townhouse brands.  Cheez-it, lapping an exceptional prior year quarter, also grew consumption. North America cereal net sales increased due to the recovery in shipments and share in our U.S. cereal business following the 2021 fire and strike.  North America operating profit increased 8.0% primarily due to growth in net sales and the lapping of residual fire and strike costs in the year-ago period, which more than offset the impact of high input-cost inflation and other supply pressures, costs related to the pending separation, and higher brand-building investment. Currency-neutral adjusted operating profit increased 21%, after excluding the impact of business and portfolio realignment and separation costs.
Reported net sales increased 2.5% as favorable price/mix and momentum in snacks was partially offset by unfavorable foreign currency and the impact of suspending shipments into Russia. Organic net sales increased 7.6% after excluding the impact of foreign currency. Snacks net sales growth was broad-based across the region led by Pringles.Cereal net sales declined for the quarter on an as reported basis but grew on a currency neutral basis.Reported operating profit decreased 6.0% due primarily to unfavorable foreign currency and lapping an exceptional prior year quarter. Currency-neutral adjusted operating profit decreased 0.8% after excluding the impact of foreign currency.
Reported net sales increased 14%, as price/mix growth and in-market momentum in snacks and cereal across the region more than offset lower volume. Organic net sales increased 11%, after excluding the impact of foreign currency.  Snacks net sales increased led by Pringles growth across the region.Cereal net sales increased across the region led by strong growth in Mexico.Reported operating profit increased 76% as the impact of net sales growth and favorable mark-to-market more than offset higher input costs and increased brand-building investment. Currency-neutral adjusted operating profit increased 20% after excluding the impact of mark-to-market, and foreign currency.
Reported net sales increased 7.2%, as price/mix growth and momentum in snacks, noodles and other, and cereal more than offset unfavorable foreign currency. Organic net sales increased 20% after excluding the impact of foreign currency.Growth was led by snacks, noodles and other, as well as cereal despite unfavorable foreign currency.Reported operating profit increased 12% as higher net sales more than offset the impacts of high cost inflation, increased brand-building investment, and unfavorable foreign currency translation. Currency-neutral adjusted operating profit increased 21%, after excluding the impact of foreign currency.
Reported operating profit decreased significantly versus the comparable prior year quarter due primarily to unfavorable mark-to-market impacts.  Currency-neutral adjusted operating profit decreased $8 million from the prior year after excluding mark-to-market.
Our currency-neutral adjusted gross profit and gross profit margin performance for the quarter ended April 1, 2023 and April 2, 2022 are reconciled to the directly comparable GAAP measures as follows:
For more information on the reconciling items in the table above, please refer to the Significant items impacting comparability section.(a) Gross profit is equal to net sales less cost of goods sold.(b) Gross profit as a percentage of net sales. Reported gross margin for the quarter decreased 170 basis points versus the prior year due primarily to unfavorable mark-to-market, cost inflation, and a mix shift towards emerging markets, which more than offset the lapping of residual fire and strike costs in the year-ago period, and the impact of productivity and revenue growth management initiatives.  Currency-neutral adjusted gross margin increased 60 basis points compared to the first quarter of 2022 after eliminating the impact of mark-to-market and foreign currency.
The reporting currency for our financial statements is the U.S. dollar. Certain of our assets, liabilities, expenses and revenues are denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar, primarily in the euro, British pound, Australian dollar, Canadian dollar, Mexican peso, Brazilian Real, Nigerian Naira, Russian ruble, Polish zloty, and Egyptian pound. To prepare our consolidated financial statements, we must translate those assets, liabilities, expenses and revenues into U.S. dollars at the applicable exchange rates. As a result, increases and decreases in the value of the U.S. dollar against these other currencies will affect the amount of these items in our consolidated financial statements, even if their value has not changed in their original currency. This could have significant impact on our results if such increase or decrease in the value of the U.S. dollar is substantial.
For the quarters ended April 1, 2023 and April 2, 2022, interest expense was $80 million and $56 million, respectively. The increase from the prior year quarter is due primarily to higher interest rates on commercial paper and floating rate debt versus the prior year.
Our reported effective tax rate for the quarters ended April 1, 2023 and April 2, 2022 was 22% and 21%, respectively. Our adjusted effective tax rate for the quarters ended April 1, 2023 and April 2, 2022 was 23% and 20%, respectively. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates could impact the expected effective income tax rate as it is dependent upon U.S. dollar earnings of foreign subsidiaries doing business in various countries with differing statutory rates. Additionally, the rate could be impacted by tax legislation and if pending uncertain tax matters, including tax positions that could be affected by planning initiatives, are resolved more or less favorably than we currently expect.
For more information on the reconciling items in the table above, please refer to the Significant items impacting comparability section.
We anticipate current cash and marketable security balances, operating cash flows, together with our credit facilities and other financing sources including commercial paper, credit and bond markets, will be adequate to meet our operating, investing and financing needs. We expect cash provided by operating activities of approximately $1.7-$1.8 billion and capital expenditures of approximately $700 million in 2023.  We currently have $2.5 billion of unused revolving credit agreements, including $1.5 billion effective through 2026 and $1.0 billion effective through December 2023, as well as continued access to the commercial paper markets.  We are currently in compliance with all debt covenants and do not have material uncertainty about our ability to maintain compliance in future periods. We continue to utilize available capacity within the Monetization Programs to maintain financial flexibility without negatively impacting working capital.  Our principal source of liquidity is operating cash flows supplemented by borrowings for major acquisitions and other significant transactions. Our cash-generating capability is one of our fundamental strengths and provides us with substantial financial flexibility in meeting operating and investing needs.We have historically reported negative working capital primarily as the result of our focus to improve core working capital by reducing our levels of trade receivables and inventory while extending the timing of payment of our trade payables.  The impacts of the extended customer terms program and the monetization programs on core working capital are largely offsetting.  These programs are all part of our ongoing working capital management.We periodically monitor our supplier payment terms to assess whether our terms are competitive and in line with local market terms. To the extent that such assessment indicates that our supplier payment terms are not aligned with local market terms, we may seek to adjust our terms, including extending or shortening our payment due dates as appropriate. Supplier payment term modifications did not have a material impact on our cash flows during 2022, and are not expected to have a material impact in 2023.We have a substantial amount of indebtedness which results in current maturities of long-term debt and notes payable which can have a significant impact on working capital as a result of the timing of these required payments. These factors, coupled with the use of our ongoing cash flows from operations to service our debt obligations, pay dividends, fund acquisition opportunities, and repurchase our common stock, reduce our working capital amounts. We had negative working capital of $1.7 billion and $2.2 billion as of April 1, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.  The following table reflects net debt amounts:
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows:
The principal source of our operating cash flow is net earnings, meaning cash receipts from the sale of our products, net of costs to manufacture, distribute, and market our products.Net cash provided by our operating activities for the quarter ended April 1, 2023, totaled $276 million compared to $327 million in the prior year period. The decrease is due primarily to incremental separation costs and incentive compensation.Our cash conversion cycle (defined as days of inventory and trade receivables outstanding less days of trade payables outstanding, based on a trailing 12 month average), was approximately negative 1 day and negative 10 days for the 12 month periods ended April 1, 2023 and April 2, 2022, respectively.   We measure cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities reduced by expenditures for property additions. We use this non-GAAP financial measure of cash flow to focus management and investors on the amount of cash available for debt repayment, dividend distributions, acquisition opportunities, and share repurchases. Our cash flow metric is reconciled to the most comparable GAAP measure, as follows:
Our non-GAAP measure for cash flow decreased to $73 million in the quarter ended April 1, 2023, from $189 million in the prior year due primarily to higher capital expenditures, incremental separation costs, and incentive compensation.
Our net cash used in investing activities totaled $205 million for the quarter ended April 1, 2023 compared to $112 million in the comparable prior year period due primarily to higher capital expenditures.
Our net cash used in financing activities for the quarter ended April 1, 2023 totaled $33 million compared to cash used of $171 million during the comparable prior year period.  The year-over-year variance was driven by the repurchase of $300 million of our common stock during the prior year.Additionally, during the first quarter of 2023, the Company issued $400 million of ten-year 5.25% Notes due 2033, resulting in net proceeds after discount and underwriting commissions of $396 million. The proceeds from these notes were used for general corporate purposes, including the payment of offering related fees and expenses, repayment of the $210 million 2.75% Notes when they matured on March 1, 2023, and repayment of a portion of commercial paper borrowings. The Notes contain customary covenants that limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries (as defined) to incur certain liens or enter into certain sale and lease-back transactions, as well as a change of control provision.In December 2022, the Board of Directors approved an authorization to repurchase up to $1.5 billion of the Company's common stock through December 2025.  This authorization is intended to allow the Company to repurchase shares for general corporate purposes and to offset issuances for employee benefit programs.Total purchases for the quarter ended April 2, 2022, were 5 million shares for $300 million. The Company didn't repurchase shares during the quarter ended April 1, 2023.We paid cash dividends of $202 million in the year-to-date period ended April 1, 2023, compared to $197 million during the comparable prior year period.  In April 2023, the Board of Directors declared a dividend of $.59 per common share, payable on June 15, 2023 to shareholders of record at the close of business on June 1, 2023. Additionally, the Company's Board of Directors announced plans to increase the quarterly dividend to $0.60 per share beginning with the third quarter of 2023.We continue to maintain both a Five-Year and a 364-Day Credit Agreement, which had no outstanding borrowings as of April 1, 2023, and contain customary covenants and warranties, including specified restrictions on indebtedness, liens and a specified interest expense coverage ratio.  If an event of default occurs, then, to the extent permitted, the administrative agents may terminate the commitments under the credit facilities, accelerate any outstanding loans under the agreements, and demand the deposit of cash collateral equal to the lender's letter of credit exposure plus interest.Our Notes contain customary covenants that limit the ability of the Company and its restricted subsidiaries (as defined) to incur certain liens or enter into certain sale and lease-back transactions and also contain a change of control provision. There are no significant restrictions on the payment of dividends.  We were in compliance with all covenants as of April 1, 2023.The Notes do not contain acceleration of maturity clauses that are dependent on credit ratings. A change in our credit ratings could limit our access to the U.S. short-term debt market and/or increase the cost of refinancing long-term debt in the future. However, even under these circumstances, we would continue to have access to our 364-Day Credit Facility, which expires in December 2023, as well as our Five-Year Credit Agreement, which expires in December 2026. This source of liquidity is unused and available on an unsecured basis, although we do not currently plan to use it.
We have a program in which customers could extend their payment terms in exchange for the elimination of early payment discounts (Extended Terms Program).  In order to mitigate the net working capital impact of the Extended Terms Program for discrete customers, we entered into agreements to sell, on a revolving basis, certain trade accounts receivable balances to third party financial institutions (Monetization Programs). Transfers under the Monetization Programs are accounted for as sales of receivables resulting in the receivables being de-recognized from our Consolidated Balance Sheet. The Monetization Programs provide for the continuing sale of certain receivables on a revolving basis until terminated by either party; however the maximum funding from receivables that may be sold at any time is currently approximately $945 million, but may be increased or decreased as customers move in or out of the Extended Terms Program and as additional financial institutions move in or out of the Monetization Programs. During 2023 the Company amended the agreements to increase the previous maximum receivables sold limit from approximately $920 million as of December 31, 2022.  Accounts receivable sold of $911 million and $865 million remained outstanding under this arrangement as of April 1, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The Monetization Programs are designed to directly offset the impact the Extended Terms Program would have on the days-sales-outstanding (DSO) metric that is critical to the effective management of the Company's accounts receivable balance and overall working capital.  Current DSO levels within North America are consistent with DSO levels prior to the execution of the Extended Term Program and Monetization Programs.
We periodically monitor our supplier payment terms to assess whether our terms are competitive and in line with local market terms.  To the extent that such assessment indicates that our supplier payment terms are not aligned with local market terms, we may seek to adjust our terms, including extending or shortening our payment due dates as appropriate, however, we do not expect supplier payment term modifications to have a material impact on our cash flows during 2023.  The Company establishes competitive market-based terms with our suppliers, regardless of whether they participate in supplier finance programs, which generally range from 0 to 150 days dependent on  their respective industry and geography.  We have agreements with third parties (Supplier Finance Programs) to provide accounts payable tracking systems which facilitate participating suppliers’ ability to monitor and, if elected, sell our payment obligations to designated third-party financial institutions. Participating suppliers may, at their sole discretion, make offers to sell one or more of our payment obligations prior to their scheduled due dates at a discounted price to participating financial institutions.  We have no economic interest in the sale of these suppliers’ receivables and no direct financial relationship with the financial institutions concerning these services. Our obligations to our suppliers, including amounts due and scheduled payment dates, are not impacted by suppliers’ decisions to sell amounts under the arrangements. However, our right to offset balances due from suppliers against payment obligations is restricted by the agreements for those payment obligations that have been sold by suppliers.
If financial institutions were to terminate their participation in the Monetization Programs and we are not able to modify related customer payment terms, working capital could be negatively impacted.  Additionally, working capital could be negatively impacted if we shorten our supplier payment terms as a result of supplier negotiations.  For suppliers participating in the Supplier Finance Programs, financial institutions may terminate their participation or we could experience a downgrade in our credit rating that could result in higher costs to suppliers. If working capital is negatively impacted as a result of these events and we were unable to secure alternative programs, we may have to utilize our various financing arrangements for short-term liquidity or increase our long-term borrowings.
Reflecting its strong year-to-date results, underlying trends, and confidence in its outlook, Kellogg Company has updated its full-year 2023 guidance as follows:•Raises its organic-basis net sales growth guidance to a tightened range of +6% to +7%, from its prior guidance of +5 to +7%.  This reflects the strength of its first quarter results, and the guidance continues to assume price/mix growth, and sustained momentum in snacks and emerging markets, partially offset by the assumption of a gradual rise in price elasticities.•Raises its guidance for adjusted-basis operating profit growth to +8% to +10%  on a currency-neutral basis, from its prior guidance of +7 to +9%.  This reflects the higher net sales and earlier progress toward profit margin recovery.•Raises its guidance for an adjusted-basis earnings per share decline to (1)% to (3)% on a currency-neutral basis, from prior guidance of approximately (2)% to (4)%. This improved outlook reflects the higher operating profit outlook, while still incorporating significant year-on-year pressure from the impact on pension income and interest expense of lower financial asset values and higher interest rates.•Affirms for net cash provided by operating activities to be approximately $1.7 - $1.8 billion, with capital expenditure of approximately $0.7 billion, resulting in affirming its guidance for cash flow of approximately $1.0 - $1.1 billion.  This is below 2022 levels due solely to approximately $0.3 billion of up-front charges and capital expenditure related to the Company's pending separation, without which cash flow would be higher year on year.Excluded from this guidance are any significant supply chain or other prolonged market disruptions related to the pandemic or global economy.
We are unable to reasonably estimate the potential full-year financial impact of mark-to-market adjustments because these impacts are dependent on future changes in market conditions. Similarly, because of volatility in foreign exchange rates and shifts in country mix of our international earnings, we are unable to reasonably estimate the potential full-year financial impact of foreign currency translation. As a result, these impacts are not included in the guidance provided. Therefore, we are unable to provide a full reconciliation of these non-GAAP measures used in our guidance without unreasonable effort as certain information necessary to calculate such measure on a GAAP basis is unavailable, dependent on future events outside of our control and cannot be predicted without unreasonable efforts by the Company.
See the table below that outlines the projected impact of certain other items that are excluded from non-GAAP guidance for 2023:
* 2023 full year guidance for net sales, operating profit, and earnings per share are provided on a non-GAAP basis only because certain information necessary to calculate such measures on a GAAP basis is unavailable, dependent on future events outside of our control and cannot be predicted without unreasonable efforts by the Company.  These items for 2023 include impacts of mark-to-market adjustments for pension plans (service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, and other net periodic pension costs are not excluded), commodity contracts, certain equity investments, and certain foreign currency contracts.  The Company is providing quantification of known adjustment items where available.** Represents the estimated income tax effect on the reconciling items, using weighted-average statutory tax rates, depending upon the applicable jurisdiction.
This Report contains “forward-looking statements” with projections concerning, among other things, the anticipated separation of the Company’s North American cereal business, the Company’s restructuring programs, the integration of acquired businesses, our strategy, financial principles, and plans, initiatives, improvements and growth; sales, margins, advertising, promotion, merchandising, brand building, operating profit, and earnings per share; innovation; investments; capital expenditures, asset write-offs and expenditures and costs related to productivity or efficiency initiatives; the impact of accounting changes and significant accounting estimates; our ability to meet interest and debt principal repayment obligations; minimum contractual obligations; future common stock repurchases or debt reduction, effective income tax rate; cash flow and core working capital improvements; interest expense; commodity and energy prices; ESG performance; and employee benefit plan costs and funding. Forward-looking statements include predictions of future results or activities and may contain the words “expect,” “believe,” “will,” “can,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “project,” “should,” or words or phrases of similar meaning. For example, forward-looking statements are found in this Item 1 and in several sections of Management’s Discussion and Analysis.  Our actual results or activities may differ materially from these predictions. Our future results could be affected by a variety of other factors, including the ability to effect the separation transaction and to meet the conditions related thereto; the ability of the North American cereal business to succeed as a standalone publicly traded company; potential uncertainty during the pendency of the separation transaction that could affect the Company’s financial performance; the possibility that the separation transaction will not be completed within the anticipated time period or at all, the possibility that the separation transaction will not achieve its intended benefits; the possibility of disruption, including changes to existing business relationships, disputes, litigation or unanticipated costs in connection with the separation transaction; uncertainty of the expected financial performance of the Company or the separated North American cereal business following completion of the separation transaction; negative effects of the announcement or pendency of the separation transaction on the market price of the Company’s securities and/or on the financial performance of the Company;  uncertainty of the magnitude, duration, geographic reach, impact on the global economy and current and potential travel restrictions of the COVID-19 outbreak, the current, and uncertain future, impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business, growth, reputation, prospects, financial condition, operating results (including components of our financial results), and cash flows and liquidity, the residual impact of the 12-week labor strike at the Company's U.S. cereal plants and a fire at one of the plants, the ability to implement restructuring as planned, whether the expected amount of costs associated with restructuring will differ from forecasts, whether we will be able to realize the anticipated benefits from restructuring in the amounts and times expected, the ability to realize the anticipated benefits and synergies from business acquisitions in the amounts and at the times expected, the impact of competitive conditions, the effectiveness of pricing, advertising, and promotional programs; the success of innovation, renovation and new product introductions; the recoverability of the carrying value of goodwill and other intangibles, the success of productivity improvements and business transitions, commodity and energy prices, transportation costs, labor costs, disruptions or inefficiencies in supply chain, the availability of and interest rates on short-term and long-term financing, actual market performance of benefit plan trust investments, the levels of spending on systems initiatives, properties, business opportunities, integration of acquired businesses, and other general and administrative costs, changes in consumer behavior and preferences, the effect of U.S. and foreign economic conditions on items such as interest rates, statutory tax rates, currency conversion and availability, legal and regulatory factors including changes in food safety, advertising and labeling laws and regulations, the ultimate impact of product recalls; business disruption or other losses from war, terrorist acts or political unrest; and the risks and uncertainties described in Item 1A below. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they were made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update them.