
We are a leading supplier of process control and yield management solutions and services for the semiconductor and related electronics industries. Our broad portfolio of inspection and metrology products, and related service, software and other offerings, support R&D and manufacturing of integrated circuits (“IC”), wafers and reticles. Our products, services and expertise are used by our customers to measure, detect, analyze and resolve critical and nanometric level product defects, helping them to manage manufacturing process challenges and to obtain higher finish product yields at lower cost. We also offer advanced technology solutions to address various manufacturing needs of printed circuit boards (“PCB”), flat panel displays (“FPD”), specialty semiconductor devices and other electronic components, including advanced packaging, light-emitting diodes (“LED”), power devices, compound semiconductor, and data storage industries, as well as general materials research. Our semiconductor customers generally operate in one or both of the major semiconductor device manufacturing markets: memory and foundry/logic. The pervasive and increasing needs for semiconductors in many consumer and industrial products, the rapid proliferation of new applications for more advanced semiconductor devices, and the increasing complexity associated with leading edge semiconductor manufacturing drives demand for our process control and yield management solutions. Continuing advancement of technology spurred by the economic, power and performance benefits of being at the leading edge, increasing involvement in legacy nodes as semiconductor content increases, and innovation and growth of new enabling technologies are fueling long-term growth for the semiconductor equipment industry. As we get further into 2023, the macro-driven slowdown continues to have an impact on semiconductor device demand as the semiconductor industry rebalances its supply chain and inventory levels. As a result, memory device manufacturers and foundry/logic customers are reducing their capacity expansion-focused capital expenditure plans for calendar 2023. While we continue to invest in technological innovation, we are focusing on moderating our spending levels to reflect the changing environment. Push out or cancellation of deliveries to our customers could cause earnings volatility, due to the timing of revenue recognition as well as increased risk of inventory-related charges.We are organized into three reportable segments. Prior to July 1, 2022, we had a fourth segment, Other, but core assets were sold and there are no longer operations. The remaining three segments are as follows: •Semiconductor Process Control: a comprehensive portfolio of inspection, metrology and data analytics products as well as related service offerings that help IC manufacturers achieve target yields throughout the semiconductor fabrication process, from R&D to final volume production.•Specialty Semiconductor Process: advanced vacuum deposition and etching process tools used by a broad range of specialty semiconductor customers.•PCB, Display and Component Inspection: a range of inspection, testing and measurement, and direct imaging for patterning products used by manufacturers of PCBs, FPDs, advanced packaging, microelectromechanical systems (“MEMS”) and other electronic components.A majority of our revenues are derived from outside the U.S., and include geographic regions such as China, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, Europe and Israel, and Rest of Asia. China is emerging as a major region for manufacturing of logic and memory chips, adding to its role as the world’s largest consumer of ICs. Additionally, a significant portion of global FPD and PCB manufacturing has migrated to China. Chinese government initiatives are propelling China to expand its domestic manufacturing capacity and attracting investment from semiconductor manufacturers from Taiwan, Korea, Japan and the U.S. Although China is currently seen as an important long-term growth region for the semiconductor and electronics capital equipment sector, Commerce has adopted regulations and added certain China-based entities to the U.S. Entity List (a list of parties that are generally ineligible to receive U.S.-regulated items without prior licensing from BIS), restricting our ability to provide products and services to such entities without a license. In addition, Commerce has imposed export licensing requirements on China-based customers that are military end users or engaged in military end uses, as well as requiring our customers to obtain an export license when they use certain semiconductor capital equipment based on U.S. technology to manufacture products connected to certain entities on the U.S. Entity List. In addition, in October 2022, the BIS Rules imposed export licensing requirements for certain U.S. semiconductor and high-performance computing technology (including wafer fab equipment), for the use of such technology for certain end uses in China, and for the provision of support by U.S. Persons to certain advanced IC fabs located in China. In particular, the BIS Rules impose export license requirements effectively on all KLA products and services to customers located in China that fabricate:a.Non-planar ICs (e.g., FinFet or GaaFeT) or 14/16nm and below logic ICs;b.NAND ICs at 128 layers and above; andc.DRAM ICs using a “production” technology node of 18 nanometer half-pitch or less. KLA is also restricted from providing certain U.S. origin tools, software and technology to certain wafer fab equipment manufacturers and maskshops located in China, absent an export license. We are taking appropriate measures to comply with them and are applying for export licenses, when required, to avoid disruption to our customers’ operations. While some export licenses have been obtained by us or our customers, there can be no assurance that export licenses applied for by either us or our customers will be granted. The BIS Rules are complex, and we are working on assessing their full impact on KLA. The rules have not significantly impacted our operations to date, but the possible negative effects on our future business of export licenses not being granted could be material and could result in a substantial reduction to our remaining performance obligations (“RPO”) or require us to return substantial deposits received from customers in China for future purchase orders. We are still assessing the aggregate potential impact of the existing regulations and BIS Rules on our financial results and operations. There is a likelihood of system reallocation of products to other customers where supply is meaningfully below demand for those products. See Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” in this report for more information regarding how such actions by the U.S. government or another country could significantly impact our ability to provide our products and services to existing and potential customers, especially in China, and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. The following table sets forth some of our key quarterly unaudited financial information:
(1)For the explanation why our net income attributable to KLA decreased to $697.8 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, refer to the “Results of Operations” section below, as the change is a result of movements in various income statement line items.(2)Diluted net income per share is computed independently for each of the quarters presented based on the weighted-average fully diluted shares outstanding for each quarter. Therefore, the sum of quarterly diluted net income per share information may not equal annual (or other multiple-quarter calculations of) diluted net income per share.
The preparation of our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions in applying our accounting policies that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates and assumptions on historical experience and evaluate them on an ongoing basis to ensure that they remain reasonable under current conditions. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We discuss the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors on a quarterly basis, and the Audit Committee has reviewed our related disclosure in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. There have been no material changes in our critical accounting estimates and policies since our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. Refer to Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 for additional details on significant accounting policies. In addition, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” contained in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 for a complete description of our critical accounting estimates.
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including those recently adopted and the expected dates of adoption as well as estimated effects, if any, on our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of those not yet adopted, see Note 1 “Basis of Presentation” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our business is affected by the concentration of our customer base and our customers’ capital equipment procurement schedules as a result of their investment plans. Our product revenues in any particular period are impacted by the amount of new orders we receive during that period and, depending upon the duration of manufacturing and installation cycles, in the preceding periods. Revenue is also impacted by average customer pricing, customer revenue deferrals associated with volume purchase agreements, the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates and increased trade restrictions as discussed in the "Executive Summary" section above. Service revenues are generated from product maintenance and support services, as well as billable time and material service calls made to our customers. The amount of our service revenues is typically a function of the number of systems installed at our customers’ sites and the utilization of those systems, but it is also impacted by other factors, such as our rate of service contract renewals, the types of systems being serviced and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Product revenues during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to strong demand for many of our products, especially our inspection and metrology portfolios, as well as increases from continued growth in the specialty semiconductor markets.Service revenues during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to an increase in our installed base.
(1)Segment revenues exclude corporate allocations and the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. For additional details, refer to Note 18 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.Revenues from our Semiconductor Process Control segment during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to strong demand for many of our products, especially those in our inspection and metrology portfolios. Revenues in the Specialty Semiconductor Process segment during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to continued growth in the specialty semiconductor market. Revenues in the PCB, Display and Component Inspection segment during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 decreased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to market softening.The following is a summary of revenues by geographic region, based on ship-to location, for the indicated periods:
A significant portion of our revenues continues to be generated in Asia, where a substantial portion of the world’s semiconductor manufacturing capacity is located, and we expect that trend to continue.
Our gross margin fluctuates with revenue levels and product mix and is affected by variations in costs related to manufacturing and servicing our products, including our ability to scale our operations efficiently and effectively in response to prevailing business conditions.The following table summarizes the major factors that contributed to the changes in gross margin:
Changes in gross margin, which are driven by the revenue volume of products and services, reflect our ability to leverage existing infrastructure to generate higher revenues. Changes in gross margin from the mix of products and services sold reflect the impact of changes within the composition of product and service offerings. Changes in gross margin from manufacturing labor, overhead and efficiencies reflect our ability to manage costs and drive productivity as we scale our manufacturing activity to respond to customer requirements, and amortization of intangible assets. Changes in gross margin from other service and manufacturing costs include the impact of customer support costs, including the efficiencies with which we deliver services to our customers, and the effectiveness with which we manage our production plans and inventory risk.The decrease in our gross margin during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 is primarily due to increases in other service and manufacturing costs, partially offset by a higher revenue volume of products and services sold.
(1)    Segment gross profit is calculated as segment revenues less segment costs of revenues and excludes corporate allocations, amortization of intangible assets, inventory fair value adjustments, acquisition related costs and the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. For additional details, refer to Note 18 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.Gross profit in the Semiconductor Process Control segment during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to a higher revenue volume of products and services sold, partially offset by an increase in other service and manufacturing costs. Gross profit in the Specialty Semiconductor Process segment during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to a higher revenue volume, partially offset by a less favorable mix of products and services sold as well as an increase in other service and manufacturing costs. Gross profit in the PCB, Display and Component Inspection segment during the three and nine months ended March 31, 2023 decreased compared to the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to a lower revenue volume of products and services sold and an increase in other service and manufacturing costs, partially offset by a more favorable mix of products and services sold.
R&D expenses may fluctuate with product development phases and project timing as well as our R&D efforts. As technological innovation is essential to our success, we may incur significant costs associated with R&D projects, including compensation for engineering talent, engineering material costs and other expenses.
R&D expenses during the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to an increase in employee-related expenses of $25.1 million as a result of additional engineering headcount contributing to higher employee compensation and benefit costs, restructuring expense of $6.6 million, an increase in engineering project material costs of $4.4 million and an increase in depreciation expense of $4.4 million.
R&D expenses during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to an increase in employee-related expenses of $75.9 million as a result of additional engineering headcount contributing to higher employee compensation and benefit costs, an increase in engineering project material costs of $63.8 million, an increase in depreciation expense of $15.3 million and restructuring expense of $6.6 million.Our future operating results will depend significantly on our ability to produce products and provide services that have a competitive advantage in our marketplace. To do this, we believe we must continue to make substantial and focused investments in our R&D. We remain committed to product development in new and emerging technologies.
SG&A expenses during the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to increases in the following areas: facilities-related expense of $7.3 million, restructuring expense of $6.4 million and employee travel expenses of $6.1 million.
SG&A expenses during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to $16.8 million of compensation-related expense from the sale of Orbograph Ltd. (“Orbograph”) and $6.4 million of restructuring expense along with increases in the following: depreciation expense of $27.3 million, facilities-related expense of $24.8 million, employee travel expenses of $19.0 million, and allowances for credit losses of $13.3 million.
Restructuring charges were $19.1 million and zero for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Restructuring charges were $35.9 million and $0.9 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. As of March 31, 2023, the accrual for restructuring charges was $20.2 million. For additional information refer to Note 19 “Restructuring Charges” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other expense (income), net is comprised primarily of realized gains or losses on sales of marketable securities, gains or losses from revaluations of certain foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities as well as foreign currency contracts, interest-related accruals (such as interest and penalty accruals related to our tax obligations) and interest income earned on our invested cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest expense during the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to additional interest expense on our $3.0 billion Senior Notes issued in June 2022.The change in other expense (income), net during the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily due to an increase of $19.2 million of interest income due to higher interest rates.
Interest expense during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 increased compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to additional interest expense on our $3.0 billion Senior Notes issued in June 2022.The change in other expense (income), net during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily due to the following: a gain of $29.7 million from the sale of our interest in Orbograph to a private equity firm in the current fiscal year, higher interest income of $41.0 million compared to the prior fiscal year due to higher interest rates, a higher fair value net gain of $22.9 million from an equity security compared to the prior fiscal year, and decreases in accruals related to uncertain tax positions of $12.5 million in the current fiscal year.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we had no loss on extinguishment of debt. For the nine months ended March 31, 2023, loss on extinguishment of debt reflected a pre-tax net loss of $13.3 million associated with the redemption of $500.0 million of the Senior Notes due 2024, including associated redemption premiums, accrued interest and other fees and expenses. We had no loss on extinguishment of debt in the three and nine months ended March 31, 2022.
The following table provides details of income taxes:
The effective tax rate during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was lower compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due a decrease of $6.8 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 relating to a non-deductible increase in the value of the assets held within our Executive Deferred Savings Plan (“EDSP”).The effective tax rate during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was higher compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 primarily due to the impact of the following items that occurred during the nine months ended March 31, 2022:     •Tax expense decreased by $394.5 million relating to a non-recurring tax benefit resulting from the intra-entity transfers of certain intellectual property (“IP”) rights. During the nine months ended March 31, 2022, we completed intra-entity transfers of IP rights to one of our Singapore subsidiaries in order to better align the ownership of these rights with how our business operates. The transfers did not result in taxable gains; however, our Singapore subsidiary recognized deferred tax assets for the book and tax basis difference of the eligible transferred IP rights; and•Tax expense decreased by $69.1 million relating to an internal restructuring reducing the deferred tax liability on unremitted earnings; partially offset by •Tax expense increased by $163.7 million relating to a non-recurring tax expense resulting from a new Israel tax law enacted on November 15, 2021. The new Israel tax law limits our ability to maintain our previous representation that the historical earnings were permanently reinvested in Israel. We recorded deferred tax liability and related tax expense of $163.7 million in accordance with the new Israel tax law.Our future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as tax legislation, the geographic composition of our pre-tax income, the amount of our pre-tax income as business activities fluctuate, non-deductible expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions, R&D credits as a percentage of aggregate pre-tax income, non-taxable or non-deductible increases or decreases in the assets held within our EDSP, the tax effects of employee stock activity and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.For discussions on tax examinations, assessments and certain related proceedings, see Note 13 “Income Taxes” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of March 31, 2023, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $2.89 billion, which represents an increase of $182.2 million from June 30, 2022. The increase is due to net cash provided by operating activities of $2.71 billion and net proceeds from the sale of a business of $75.4 million, partially offset by stock repurchases of $923.0 million, net repayments of debt of $787.3 million, cash used for payment of dividends and dividend equivalents of $553.0 million, capital expenditures of $262.9 million and $73.7 million of tax withholding payments related to vested and released restricted stock units (“RSU”). As of March 31, 2023, $1.02 billion of our $2.89 billion of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices. We currently intend to indefinitely reinvest $89.8 million of the cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by our foreign subsidiaries for which we assert that earnings are permanently reinvested. If, however, a portion of these funds were to be repatriated to the United States, we would be required to accrue and pay state and foreign taxes of approximately 1% - 22% of the funds repatriated. The amount of taxes due will depend on the amount and manner of the repatriation, as well as the location from which the funds are repatriated. We have accrued state and foreign tax on the remaining cash of $0.93 billion of the $1.02 billion held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices. As such, these funds can be returned to the U.S. without accruing any additional U.S. tax expense.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, our Board of Directors declared a regular quarterly cash dividend of $1.30 per share on our outstanding common stock, which was paid on March 1, 2023 to our stockholders of record as of the close of business on February 13, 2023. During the same period in fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, our Board of Directors declared and paid a regular quarterly cash dividend of $1.05 per share on our outstanding common stock. The total amount of regular quarterly cash dividends and dividend equivalents paid during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $180.9 million and $159.0 million, respectively. The total amount of regular quarterly cash dividends and dividend equivalents paid during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $553.0 million and $480.9 million, respectively. The amount of accrued dividend equivalents payable for regular quarterly cash dividends on unvested RSUs with dividend equivalent rights as of March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022 was $11.7 million and $11.2 million, respectively. These amounts will be paid upon vesting of the underlying unvested RSUs as described in Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
The shares of common stock repurchased under our stock repurchase program have reduced our basic and diluted weighted-average shares outstanding for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. The stock repurchase program is intended, in part, to mitigate the potential dilutive impact related to our equity incentive plans and shares issued in connection with our Employee Stock Purchase Program as well as to return excess cash to our stockholders.
Historically, we have financed our liquidity requirements through cash generated from our operations. Net cash provided by operating activities during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was $2.71 billion compared to $2.49 billion during the nine months ended March 31, 2022. This increase of $217.2 million resulted primarily from the following: •An increase in collections of approximately $1.5 billion mainly driven by higher shipments and prepayments; and •An increase in interest income of approximately $41 million; partially offset by•An increase in accounts payable payments of approximately $867 million; •An increase in employee-related payments of approximately $192 million; •An increase in income tax payments of approximately $96 million;•An increase in debt interest payment of approximately $81 million; and•An increase in other tax payments of approximately $25 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was $408.1 million compared to $851.1 million during the nine months ended March 31, 2022. This decrease in cash used was mainly due to a decrease in cash used in business acquisitions of $443.7 million and an increase in proceeds from the sale of a business of $75.4 million, partially offset by an increase in net purchases of available-for-sale and trading securities of $47.6 million and an increase in capital expenditures of $28.7 million.
Net cash used in financing activities during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was $2.32 billion compared to net cash used in financing activities of $1.65 billion during the nine months ended March 31, 2022. This increase was mainly due to increases in repayment of debt of $742.3 million, a decrease in proceeds from revolving credit facility of $300.0 million and cash paid for dividends and dividend equivalents of $72.1 million, partially offset by a decrease in cash used for common stock repurchases of $471.2 million.
In June 2022, we issued $3.00 billion aggregate principal amount of senior, unsecured notes (the “2022 Senior Notes”) as follows: $1.00 billion of 4.650% senior, unsecured notes due July 15, 2032; $1.20 billion of 4.950% senior, unsecured notes due July 15, 2052; and $800.0 million of 5.250% senior, unsecured notes due July 15, 2062. A portion of the net proceeds of the 2022 Senior Notes was used to complete a tender offer in July 2022 for $500.0 million of our 2014 Senior Notes, as defined below, including associated redemption premiums, accrued interest and other fees and expenses. The transaction resulted in pre-tax net loss on extinguishment of debt of $13.3 million for the three months ended September 30, 2022. The remainder of the net proceeds were used for share repurchases and for general corporate purposes. Prior to June 2022, the following aggregate principal amounts of senior, unsecured long-term notes were issued in the following periods: $750.0 million in February 2020 (the “2020 Senior Notes”), $1.20 billion in March 2019 (the “2019 Senior Notes”) and $2.50 billion in November 2014 (the “2014 Senior Notes”). These, along with the 2022 Senior Notes, are collectively referred to as the “Senior Notes.”The original discounts on the Senior Notes are being amortized over the life of the debt. Interest is payable as follows: semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of each year for the 2022 Senior Notes; semi-annually on March 1 and September 1 of each year for the 2020 Senior Notes; semi-annually on March 15 and September 15 of each year for the 2019 Senior Notes; and semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year for the 2014 Senior Notes. The relevant indentures for the Senior Notes (collectively, the “Indenture”) include covenants that limit our ability to grant liens on our facilities and enter into sale and leaseback transactions.In certain circumstances involving a change of control followed by a downgrade of the rating of a series of Senior Notes by at least two of Moody’s Investors Service (“Moody’s”), S&P Global Ratings (“S&P”) and Fitch Inc. (“Fitch”), unless we have exercised our rights to redeem the Senior Notes of such series, we will be required to make an offer to repurchase all or, at the holder’s option, any part of each holder’s Senior Notes of that series pursuant to the offer (the “Change of Control Offer”). In the Change of Control Offer, we will be required to offer payment in cash equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the Senior Notes repurchased, up to, but not including, the date of repurchase.As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all of our covenants under the Indenture associated with the Senior Notes.
We have in place a Credit Agreement (“Credit Agreement”) for an unsecured Revolving Credit Facility (“Revolving Credit Facility”) with a maturity date of June 8, 2027 that allows us to borrow up to $1.50 billion. Subject to the terms of the Credit Agreement, the Revolving Credit Facility may be increased by an amount up to $250.0 million in the aggregate. During the nine months ended March 31, 2023, we borrowed $300.0 million and repaid $575.0 million. As of March 31, 2023, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility.We may borrow, repay and reborrow funds under the Revolving Credit Facility until the maturity date, at which time we may exercise two one-year extension options with the consent of the lenders. We may prepay outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility at any time without a prepayment penalty.Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility can be made as Term Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”) Loans or Alternate Base Rate (“ABR”) Loans, at the Company’s option. In the event that Term SOFR is unavailable, any Term SOFR elections will be converted to Daily Simple SOFR, if available. Each Term SOFR Loan will bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the applicable Adjusted Term SOFR rate, which is equal to the applicable Term SOFR rate plus 10 bps that shall not be less than zero, plus a spread ranging from 75 bps to 125 bps, as determined by the Company’s credit ratings at the time. Each ABR Loan will bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the ABR plus a spread ranging from 0 bps to 25 bps, as determined by the Company’s credit ratings at the time. We are also obligated to pay an annual commitment fee on the daily undrawn balance of the Revolving Credit Facility, which ranges from 4.5 bps to 12.5 bps, subject to an adjustment in conjunction with changes to our credit rating. The applicable interest rates and commitment fees are also subject to adjustment based on the Company’s performance against certain environmental sustainability key performance indicators related to greenhouse gas (“GHG”) emissions and renewable electricity usage. As of March 31, 2023, we elected to pay interest on borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility at the applicable Adjusted Term SOFR plus a spread of 100 bps and the applicable commitment fee on the daily undrawn balance of the Revolving Credit Facility was 9 bps.Under the Credit Agreement, the maximum leverage ratio, on a quarterly basis, is 3.50 to 1.00, covering the trailing four consecutive fiscal quarters for each fiscal quarter, which can be increased to 4.00 to 1.00 for a period of time in connection with a material acquisition or a series of material acquisitions. As of March 31, 2023, our maximum allowed leverage ratio was 3.50 to 1.00.We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of March 31, 2023 (the leverage ratio was 1.23 to 1.00). Considering our current liquidity position, short-term financial forecasts and ability to prepay the Revolving Credit Facility, if necessary, we expect to continue to be in compliance with our financial covenants at the end of our fiscal year ending June 30, 2023.
While demand for our products remains strong and we continue to invest in technological innovation, the recent slowdown in consumer demand and expectations of a slowing global economy are having an impact on semiconductor demand. As a result, customers are postponing capacity expansion plans and setting lower capital expenditure budgets for 2023. Accordingly, we have seen a decrease in our estimate of our significant purchase commitments. For additional details regarding our debt and other material cash commitments, refer to Note 8 “Debt” and Note 15 “Commitments and Contingencies,” respectively, to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. For additional details regarding our material cash requirements, refer to “Material Cash Requirements” in Item 7 “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report Form on 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Working capital was $4.60 billion as of March 31, 2023, which represents an increase of $302.4 million compared to our working capital of $4.30 billion as of June 30, 2022. As of March 31, 2023, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of $2.89 billion of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our liquidity may be affected by many factors, some of which are based on the normal ongoing operations of the business, spending for business acquisitions, and other factors such as uncertainty in the global and regional economies and the semiconductor, semiconductor-related and electronic device industries. Although cash requirements will fluctuate based on the timing and extent of these factors, we believe that cash generated from operations, together with the liquidity provided by existing cash and cash equivalents balances and our $1.50 billion Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements associated with working capital needs, capital expenditures, cash dividends, stock repurchases and other contractual obligations, including repayment of outstanding debt, for at least the next 12 months.Our credit ratings as of March 31, 2023 are summarized below:
In June 2022, S&P upgraded our senior unsecured credit rating from BBB+ to A-. Factors that can affect our credit ratings include changes in our operating performance, the economic environment, conditions in the semiconductor and semiconductor equipment industries, our financial position, material acquisitions and changes in our business strategy.
As of March 31, 2023, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K, that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial position, changes in financial condition, revenues and expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors. Refer to Note 15 “Commitments and Contingencies” to our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information related to indemnification obligations.