
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our audited consolidated financial statements, the accompanying notes and the MD&A included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2023 (“fiscal 2023”), as well as our unaudited interim consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in Item 1 of this Form 10-Q.  Note references are to the notes to unaudited interim consolidated financial statements included in Item 1.  All references to net earnings per share are to diluted net earnings per share.  Certain prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year’s presentation.  Amounts and percentages may not total due to rounding.
CarMax is the nation’s largest retailer of used vehicles.  We operate in two reportable segments:  CarMax Sales Operations and CarMax Auto Finance (“CAF”).  Our CarMax Sales Operations segment consists of all aspects of our auto merchandising and service operations, excluding financing provided by CAF.  Our CAF segment consists solely of our own finance operation that provides financing to customers buying retail vehicles from CarMax.  Our consolidated financial statements include the financial results related to our Edmunds Holding Company (“Edmunds”) business, which does not meet the definition of a reportable segment.  For purposes of our MD&A discussion, amounts related to that business are discussed in combination with our CarMax Sales Operations segment.  Separate discussion of these amounts is not considered meaningful for the purpose of gaining an understanding of our business, as the significant drivers of these operations in total are consistent with those of our CarMax Sales Operations segment.  Where appropriate, specific amounts related to non-reportable segments have been disclosed for informational purposes.
Our sales operations segment consists of retail sales of used vehicles and related products and services, such as wholesale vehicle sales; the sale of extended protection plan (“EPP”) products, which include extended service plans (“ESPs”) and guaranteed asset protection (“GAP”); and vehicle repair service.  We offer competitive, no-haggle prices; a broad selection of CarMax Quality Certified used vehicles; value-added EPP products; and superior customer service.  Our omni-channel platform, which gives us the largest addressable market in the used car industry, empowers our retail customers to buy a car on their terms – online, in-store or an integrated combination of both.  Our customers finance the majority of the retail vehicles purchased from us, and availability of on-the-spot financing is a critical component of the sales process.  We provide financing to qualified retail customers through CAF and our arrangements with industry-leading third-party finance providers.  All of the finance offers, whether by CAF or our third-party providers, are backed by a 3-day payoff option. As of May 31, 2023, we operated 241 used car stores in 109 U.S. television markets.
In addition to third-party finance providers, we provide vehicle financing through CAF, which offers financing solely to customers buying retail vehicles from CarMax.  CAF allows us to manage our reliance on third-party finance providers and to leverage knowledge of our business to provide qualifying customers a competitive financing option.  As a result, we believe CAF enables us to capture additional profits, cash flows and sales.  CAF income primarily reflects the interest and fee income generated by the auto loans receivable less the interest expense associated with the debt issued to fund these receivables, a provision for estimated loan losses and direct expenses.  CAF income does not include any allocation of indirect costs.  After the effect of 3-day payoffs and vehicle returns, CAF financed 42.7% of our retail used vehicle unit sales in the first three months of fiscal 2024.  As of May 31, 2023, CAF serviced approximately 1.1 million customer accounts in its $17.19 billion portfolio of managed receivables. Management regularly analyzes CAF’s operating results by assessing the competitiveness of our consumer offer, profitability, the performance of the auto loans receivable, including trends in credit losses and delinquencies, and CAF direct expenses.
The sources of revenue and gross profit from the CarMax Sales Operations segment and other non-reportable segments for the first three months of fiscal 2024 are as follows:
A high-level summary of our financial results for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 as compared to the first quarter of fiscal 2023 is as follows (1):
Net earnings per diluted share during the first quarter of fiscal 2024 included a benefit of $0.28 in connection with the receipt of settlement proceeds in a class action lawsuit related to the economic loss associated with vehicles containing Takata airbags.  Refer to “Results of Operations” for further details on our revenues and profitability.
Our primary ongoing sources of liquidity include funds provided by operations, proceeds from non-recourse funding vehicles, and borrowings under our revolving credit facility or through other financing sources.  In addition to funding our operations, this liquidity has been used to fund the repurchase of common stock under our share repurchase program and our store growth.Our current capital allocation strategy is to focus on our core business.  Given our recent performance and continued market uncertainties, we are taking a conservative approach to our capital structure in order to maintain the flexibility that allows us to efficiently access the capital markets for both CAF and CarMax as a whole.  We have taken steps to better align our expenses to sales, as well as paused our share repurchases and slowed the rate of our store growth.  We believe we have the appropriate liquidity, access to capital and financial strength to support our operations and continue investing in our strategic initiatives for the foreseeable future.
Our omni-channel experience provides a common platform across all of CarMax that leverages our scale, nationwide footprint and infrastructure and empowers our customers to buy a vehicle on their terms, whether online, in-store or through an integrated combination of online and in-store experiences.  While we expect our online and omni sales to grow over time, our goal is to provide the best experience whether in-store, online or a combination of the two.  As a result, online, omni and in-person sales can vary from quarter to quarter depending on consumer preferences and how they choose to interact with us.  Our diversified business model, combined with our exceptional associates, national scale and unparalleled omni-channel experience, is a unique advantage in the used car industry that firmly positions us to drive profitable market share gains while creating shareholder value over the long-term.  Our investments in the near term will focus on initiatives that unlock operational efficiencies and create better experiences for our associates and customers.  Examples of these initiatives include:•Leveraging Skye, our 24/7 virtual assistant, to work towards delivering a seamless digital-first shopping experience.  Skye enables us to efficiently assist customers via chat functionality while taking work out of our CEC system, allowing us to provide a response at a lower cost per transaction.  We expanded these capabilities during the first quarter of fiscal 2024 and anticipate rolling out additional functionality throughout fiscal 2024.•Testing express drop-off as part of an enhanced appraisal check out experience.  This option offers customers the ability to progress their transaction from home, saving them time in store while also saving our store teams time on each transaction.  Express drop-off is available at all of our stores.•Modernizing our auction platform to enhance the experience for dealers.  During the first quarter of fiscal 2024, we launched an integrated check-in experience that enables single sign-on across our systems and streamlines access to the information that dealers rely on most when bidding on vehicles.  Additionally, we initiated proxy bidding capabilities in a limited number of markets.  We plan to expand proxy bidding to additional markets as well as launch other enhancements in upcoming quarters. We purchased approximately 343,000 vehicles from consumers and dealers during the first quarter of fiscal 2024, down 5.2% from the prior year quarter but an improvement from the 39.8% and 22.5% year-over-year declines during the third and fourth quarters of the prior fiscal year, respectively.  Approximately 20,000 of these vehicles were purchased through dealers, up 20.1% from the prior year quarter and up 39.1% from the prior quarter.  We leverage the Edmunds sales team to open new markets and sign up new dealers for MaxOffer.  For the first quarter of fiscal 2024, our self-sufficiency rate remained above 70%.  The success of our online instant appraisal offer continues to strengthen our leadership position as the largest used vehicle buyer from consumers.We remain focused on ensuring we are efficient in our spend and are actively taking steps to further align our expenses to our sales levels.  This includes aligning staffing levels and driving efficiency gains in our stores and CECs, limiting hiring and contractor utilization in our corporate offices and continuing to align marketing spend to sales.  While our total and per unit advertising expense decreased from the prior year quarter, we anticipate maintaining per unit spend on an annual basis at a similar level during fiscal 2024 compared to fiscal 2023.Our SG&A expenses in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 decreased from the prior year quarter, independent of the receipt of $59.3 million of settlement proceeds from a class action lawsuit.  While SG&A as a percent of gross profit can fluctuate from quarter to quarter depending on variability in gross profit, our initial goal on the path to strengthening our SG&A to gross profit leverage over time is to achieve a rate in the mid-70% range on an annual basis.  While we delivered an SG&A leverage point in the mid-70% range in the first quarter, excluding the legal settlement noted above, this is typically our strongest quarter of the fiscal year for SG&A to gross profit leverage.  Achieving this annual rate will require continued efficiency gains in our operating model, gross profit growth and healthier consumer demand.  In fiscal 2024, we expect to require low single digit gross profit growth to lever SG&A, which is well below the levels we targeted during the heavy investment period of our omni transformation.  We also expect that the remainder of fiscal 2024 will benefit from the cost management actions we took in the second half of fiscal 2023.Other steps we have taken to support our business for both the short- and long-term include increasing used saleable inventory units while reducing total inventory dollars year-over-year, raising CAF's consumer rates while growing CAF's penetration, slowing our planned store growth and pausing share repurchases to provide more capital flexibility.We expect our diversified model, the scale of our operations, our investments and omni-channel strategy to provide a solid foundation for further growth.  Our long-term targets, which were disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal 2022, are as follows:•Sell between 2 million and 2.4 million vehicles through our combined retail and wholesale channels by fiscal 2026.•Generate between $33 billion and $45 billion in revenue by fiscal 2026.•Grow our nationwide share of the age 0- to 10-year old used vehicle market to more than 5% by the end of calendar 2025.The achievement of these targets is dependent on macroeconomic factors that could result in ongoing volatility in consumer demand.In calendar 2022, we estimate we sold approximately 4.0% of the age 0- to 10-year old vehicles sold on a nationwide basis, consistent with calendar 2021.  We estimate we sold approximately 4.8% of the age 0- to 10-year old vehicles sold in the current comparable store markets in which we operate in calendar 2022, consistent with calendar 2021.  External title data from January through April, the latest period for which title data is available, shows that our market share improved sequentially from the declines that we experienced during the second half of calendar 2022.  Our strategy to continue to increase our market share includes focusing on:•Delivering a customer-driven, omni-channel buying and selling experience that is a unique and powerful integration of our in-store and online capabilities.•Utilizing advertising to drive customer growth, educate customers about our omni-channel platform and to differentiate and elevate our brand.•Hiring, developing and retaining an engaged and skilled workforce.•Leveraging data and advanced analytics to continuously improve the customer experience as well as our processes and systems.•Improving efficiency in our stores and CECs and our logistics operations to reduce waste.•Opening stores in new markets and expanding our presence in existing markets.•Becoming the leading retailer of used electric vehicles in the market, which will support our business and help CarMax be part of the solution to reduce emissions.As of May 31, 2023, we had used car stores located in 109 U.S. television markets, which covered approximately 85% of the U.S. population.  The format and operating models utilized in our stores are continuously evaluated and may change or evolve over time based upon market and consumer expectations.  During the first three months of fiscal 2024, we opened one store, and during the remainder of the fiscal year we plan to open an additional four stores and our first offsite production location in the Atlanta metro market. While we execute both our short- and long-term strategy, there are trends and factors that could impact our strategic approach or our results in the short and medium term.  For additional information about risks and uncertainties facing our company, see “Risk Factors,” included in Part I. Item 1A of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2023.
For information on critical accounting policies, see "Critical Accounting Estimates" in the MD&A included in Item 7 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2023.
During the first three months of fiscal 2024, we opened one store in an existing television market (Winchester, VA).Used Vehicle Sales.  The 14.4% decrease in used vehicle revenues in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was primarily driven by a 9.6% decrease in used unit sales and a 5.5% decrease in average retail selling price, or approximately $1,600.  The decrease in used units included an 11.4% decrease in comparable store used unit sales.  Online retail sales, as defined previously, accounted for 14% of used unit sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, compared with 11% for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.During the first quarter of fiscal 2024, we believe persistent vehicle affordability challenges continued to impact our unit sales performance, as headwinds remained due to widespread inflationary pressures, higher interest rates, tightening lending standards and prolonged low consumer confidence.  While comparable store used unit sales declined 11.4% compared to the prior year quarter, it was an improvement from the 22.4% and 14.1% year-over-year declines during the prior fiscal year's third and fourth quarters, respectively.The decrease in average retail selling price in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 reflected lower vehicle acquisition costs as well as shifts in the mix of our sales by vehicle age.Wholesale Vehicle Sales.  Vehicles sold at our wholesale auctions are, on average, approximately 10 years old with more than 100,000 miles and are primarily comprised of vehicles purchased through our appraisal process that do not meet our retail standards.  Our wholesale auction prices usually reflect trends in the general wholesale market for the types of vehicles we sell, although they can also be affected by changes in vehicle mix or the average age, mileage or condition of the vehicles being sold.The 28.5% decrease in wholesale vehicle revenues in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was primarily due to a decrease in average selling price of 17.9%, or approximately $2,000, and a 13.6% decrease in unit sales.The decrease in average selling price during the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was primarily due to shifts in the mix of our sales by vehicle age as well as decreased acquisition costs compared to those stemming from the strong industry valuations in the beginning of fiscal 2023.While wholesale vehicle unit sales declined 13.6% compared to the prior year quarter, it was an improvement from the 36.7% and 19.3% year-over-year declines during the prior fiscal year's third and fourth quarters, respectively.  Our total buys from dealers and consumers also improved sequentially during this period.Other Sales and Revenues.  Other sales and revenues include revenue from the sale of ESPs and GAP (collectively reported in EPP revenues, net of a reserve for estimated contract cancellations), net third-party finance income, advertising and subscription revenues earned by our Edmunds business, and other revenues, which are predominantly comprised of service department sales.  The fees we pay to the Tier 3 providers are reflected as an offset to finance fee revenues received from the Tier 2 providers.  The mix of our retail vehicles financed by CAF, Tier 2 and Tier 3 providers, or customers that arrange their own financing, may vary from quarter to quarter depending on several factors, including the credit quality of applicants, changes in providers’ credit decisioning and external market conditions.  Changes in originations by one tier of credit providers may also affect the originations made by providers in other tiers. Other sales and revenues decreased 5.2% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024, reflecting a decline in EPP revenue and a decrease in net third-party finance income.  EPP revenues decreased 4.6%, largely reflecting the decline in our retail unit sales, partially offset by increased margins.  Net third-party finance income declined as lower Tier 2 volume, for which we generally receive a fee, was partially offset by a reduction in Tier 3 volume, for which we pay a fee.Seasonality.  Historically, our business has been seasonal.  Our stores typically experience their strongest traffic and sales in the spring and summer, with an increase in traffic and sales in February and March, coinciding with federal income tax refund season.  Sales are typically slowest in the fall.
Used Vehicle Gross Profit.  We target a dollar range of gross profit per used unit sold.  The gross profit dollar target for an individual vehicle is based on a variety of factors, including its probability of sale and its mileage relative to its age; however, it is not primarily based on the vehicle’s selling price.  Our ability to quickly adjust appraisal offers to be consistent with the broader market trade-in trends and the pace of our inventory turns reduce our exposure to the inherent continual fluctuation in used vehicle values and contribute to our ability to manage gross profit dollars per unit.  Gross profit per used unit is consistent across our omni-channel platform.We systematically adjust individual vehicle prices based on proprietary pricing algorithms in order to appropriately balance sales trends, inventory turns and gross profit achievement.  Other factors that may influence gross profit include the wholesale and retail vehicle pricing environments, vehicle reconditioning and logistics costs, and the percentage of vehicles sourced directly from consumers through our appraisal process.  Vehicles purchased directly from consumers and dealers generally have a lower cost per unit compared with vehicles purchased at auction or through other channels, which may generate more gross profit per unit.  In any given period, our gross profit may also be impacted by the age mix of vehicles sold, as older vehicles are generally more profitable.  We monitor macroeconomic factors and pricing elasticity and adjust our pricing accordingly to optimize unit sales and profitability while also maintaining a competitively priced inventory.Used vehicle gross profit decreased 8.7% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024, driven by the 9.6% decrease in total used unit sales.  Used vehicle gross profit per unit was in line with the prior year period.  We continue to focus on striking the right balance between covering cost increases, maintaining margin and passing along efficiencies to consumers to support vehicle affordability.  Wholesale Vehicle Gross Profit.  Our wholesale gross profit per unit reflects the demand for older, higher mileage vehicles, which are the mainstay of our auctions, as well as strong dealer attendance and resulting high dealer-to-car ratios at our auctions.  The frequency of our auctions, which are generally held weekly or bi-weekly, minimizes the depreciation risk on these vehicles.  Our ability to adjust appraisal offers in response to the wholesale pricing environment is a key factor that influences wholesale gross profit. Wholesale vehicle gross profit decreased 12.4% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024, primarily driven by the 13.6% decrease in wholesale unit sales.  Wholesale vehicle gross profit per unit was consistent with the prior year period.Other Gross Profit.  Other gross profit includes profits related to EPP revenues, net third-party finance income, advertising and subscription profits earned by our Edmunds business, and other revenues.  Other revenues are predominantly comprised of service department operations, including used vehicle reconditioning.  We have no cost of sales related to EPP revenues or net third-party finance income, as these represent revenues paid to us by certain third-party providers.  Third-party finance income is reported net of the fees we pay to third-party Tier 3 finance providers.  Accordingly, changes in the relative mix of the components of other gross profit can affect the composition and amount of other gross profit.  Other gross profit increased 12.2% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024, primarily driven by a $26.3 million increase in service department margins, partially offset by a decrease in EPP revenues as well as a decline in third-party finance income, as discussed above.  The increase in service department profits was driven by efficiency and cost coverage goals that we have put in place.  We expect year-over-year improvements in service in fiscal 2024 as compared to the full year of fiscal 2023.
SG&A expenses decreased 14.8% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024.  Factors contributing to the net decrease include the following: •$78.8 million decrease in other overhead costs, which included a $59.3 million benefit in connection with the receipt of settlement proceeds in a class action lawsuit related to the economic loss associated with vehicles containing Takata airbags.  Other overhead costs were also positively impacted by favorable reserve adjustments related to non-CAF uncollectible receivables that reflect improved execution at our stores and home office as well as at DMV locations.•$17.0 million decrease in advertising expense driven by our deliberate efforts to reduce marketing spend to align with sales.•$14.6 million decrease in compensation and benefits, excluding share-based compensation expense, driven by our continued focus in our stores and CECs on aligning staffing levels to sales and driving efficiency gains, as well as limiting hiring in our corporate offices.•$13.1 million increase in stock-based compensation expense, primarily related to cash-settled restricted stock units, as the expense associated with these units was primarily driven by the change in the company's stock price during the relevant periods.Excluding the legal settlement, SG&A expenses declined 5.7%, or $37.6 million, and SG&A expenses as a percent of gross profit was 75.7%, which was relatively consistent with the prior year quarter.Interest Expense.  Interest expense includes the interest related to short- and long-term debt, financing obligations and finance lease obligations.  It does not include interest on the non-recourse notes payable, which is reflected within CAF income.Interest expense of $30.5 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was relatively consistent with $28.8 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2023.Other (Income) Expense.  Other income of $1.2 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was relatively consistent with expense of $2.1 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2023.Income Taxes.  The effective income tax rate was 25.7% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 versus 25.1% in the first quarter of fiscal 2023.
CAF income primarily reflects interest and fee income generated by CAF’s portfolio of auto loans receivable less the interest expense associated with the debt issued to fund these receivables, a provision for estimated loan losses and direct CAF expenses.  Total interest margin reflects the spread between interest and fees charged to consumers and our funding costs.  Changes in the interest margin on new originations affect CAF income over time.  Increases in interest rates, which affect CAF’s funding costs, or other competitive pressures on consumer rates, could result in compression in the interest margin on new originations.  Changes in the allowance for loan losses as a percentage of ending managed receivables reflect the effect of changes in loss and delinquency experience and economic factors on our outlook for net losses expected to occur over the remaining contractual life of the loans receivable as well as changes in the mix of credit quality originated.CAF’s managed portfolio is composed primarily of loans originated over the past several years.  Trends in receivable growth and interest margins primarily reflect the cumulative effect of changes in the business over a multi-year period.  Historically, we have sought to originate loans in our core portfolio, which excludes Tier 2 and Tier 3 originations, with an underlying risk profile that we believe will, in the aggregate, result in cumulative net losses in the 2% to 2.5% range (excluding CECL-required recovery costs) over the life of the loans.  Actual loss performance of the loans may fall outside of this range based on various factors, including intentional changes in the risk profile of originations, economic conditions and wholesale recovery rates.  Current period originations reflect current trends in both our retail sales and the CAF business, including the volume of loans originated, current interest rates charged to consumers, loan terms and average credit scores.  Loans originated in a given fiscal period impact CAF income over time, as we recognize income over the life of the underlying auto loan. CAF also originates a small portion of auto loans to customers who typically would be financed by our Tier 2 and Tier 3 finance providers, in order to better understand the performance of these loans, mitigate risk and add incremental profits.  Historically, CAF has targeted originating approximately 5% of the total Tier 3 loan volume, which we increased to 10% during fiscal 2022 and throughout most of fiscal 2023.  In response to the current environment, CAF adjusted its underwriting standards, including, towards the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2023, reducing its targeted percentage of Tier 3 volume from 10% to 5%.  Within the Tier 2 space, CAF continues to originate loans on a test basis.  Any future adjustments in Tier 2 and Tier 3 will consider the broader lending environment along with the long-term sustainability of the change.  These loans have higher loss and delinquency rates than the remainder of the CAF portfolio, as well as higher contract rates.CAF income does not include any allocation of indirect costs.  Although CAF benefits from certain indirect overhead expenditures, we have not allocated indirect costs to CAF to avoid making subjective allocation decisions.  Examples of indirect costs not allocated to CAF include retail store expenses and corporate expenses.See Note 3 for additional information on CAF income and Note 4 for information on auto loans receivable, including credit quality.
•CAF Income (Decrease of $67.1 million, or 32.8%, in the first quarter of fiscal 2024)◦The decrease in CAF income for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 reflects a decrease in the net interest margin percentage and an increase in the provision for loan losses, as discussed below, partially offset by an increase in average managed receivables.•Total Interest Margin (Decreased to 6.1% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 from 7.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2023)◦The decrease in the total interest margin percentage for the first quarter was primarily driven by higher funding costs, partially offset by higher customer rates.  The interest margin percentage was also negatively impacted by the mark-to-market effects of our derivative instruments not designated as hedges for accounting purposes. •Provision for Loan Losses    (Increase of $23.1 million, or 39.9%, in the first quarter of fiscal 2024)◦The increase in the current year provision was primarily due to the effects of unfavorable loss performance within CAF's portfolio as well as the uncertain macroeconomic environment.◦The allowance for loan losses as a percentage of ending managed receivables was 3.11% as of May 31, 2023, compared with 2.85% as of May 31, 2022 and 3.02% as of February 28, 2023.  The increase in the allowance percentage from February primarily reflects the factors noted above.  CAF has continued to tighten its underwriting standards in response to the current environment.•Loan Origination and Performance◦The decrease in net loan originations in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 resulted from a decrease in used unit sales and a decrease in the average amount financed, partially offset by an increase in the net penetration rate.◦CAF net penetration increased in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to the prior year period, largely reflecting shifts in the mix of customers utilizing outside financing.◦The weighted average contract rate increased to 11.1% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024, compared with 9.0% in the prior year quarter.  This increase was primarily due to higher rates charged to customers in response to the current interest rate environment. ◦The year-over-year increase in past due accounts as a percentage of ending managed receivables in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 reflects an increase in delinquencies as well as our expansion of Tier 2 and Tier 3 originations within CAF's portfolio in the prior year.  The increase in delinquencies primarily reflects customer hardship in the current economic environment.
We anticipate opening a total of five stores in fiscal 2024, including two more stores in the New York metro market, as well as our first offsite production location in the Atlanta metro market.  We currently estimate capital expenditures will total approximately $450 million in fiscal 2024.  Capital expenditures were $422.7 million in fiscal 2023.  Planned capital spending in fiscal 2024 largely reflects spending to support our future long-term growth, including investments in auction, sales and production facilities, as well as our new stores.
Our primary ongoing cash requirements are to fund our existing operations, store expansion and improvement, CAF and strategic growth initiatives.  Since fiscal 2013, we have also elected to use cash for our share repurchase program.  Our primary ongoing sources of liquidity include funds provided by operations, proceeds from non-recourse funding vehicles and borrowings under our revolving credit facility or through other financing sources. Our current capital allocation strategy is to focus on our core business.  Given our recent performance and continued market uncertainties, we are taking a conservative approach to our capital structure in order to maintain the flexibility that allows us to efficiently access the capital markets for both CAF and CarMax as a whole.  We have taken steps to better align our expenses to sales, as well as paused our share repurchases and slowed the rate of our store growth.  We believe we have the appropriate liquidity, access to capital and financial strength to support our operations and continue investing in our strategic initiatives for the foreseeable future.  We currently target an adjusted debt-to-total capital ratio in a range of 35% to 45%.  Our adjusted debt to capital ratio, net of cash on hand, was below our targeted range for the first quarter of fiscal 2024.  In calculating this ratio, we utilize total debt excluding non-recourse notes payable, finance lease liabilities, a multiple of eight times rent expense and total shareholders’ equity.  Generally, we expect to use our revolving credit facility and other financing sources, together with stock repurchases, to maintain this targeted ratio; however, in any period, we may be outside this range due to seasonal, market, strategic or other factors.Operating Activities.  During the first three months of fiscal 2024, net cash used in operating activities totaled $185.3 million, compared with cash provided by operating activities of $531.0 million in the prior year period.  As of May 31, 2023, total inventory was $4.08 billion, representing an increase of $355.1 million compared with the balance as of the start of the fiscal year.  The increase was primarily due to an increase in saleable inventory to meet target levels as well as an increase in the average carrying cost of inventory due to market appreciation at the end of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2023 and beginning of the current fiscal year.Our operating cash flows are significantly impacted by changes in auto loans receivable, which increased $484.0 million in the current year period compared with $440.7 million in the prior year period.  The majority of the changes in auto loans receivable are accompanied by changes in non-recourse notes payable, which are issued to fund auto loans originated by CAF.  Net issuances of non-recourse notes payable were $419.7 million in the current year period compared with $297.4 million in the prior year period and are separately reflected as cash from financing activities.  Due to the presentation differences between auto loans receivable and non-recourse notes payable on the consolidated statements of cash flows, fluctuations in these amounts can have a significant impact on our operating and financing cash flows without affecting our overall liquidity, working capital or cash flows.  The change in net cash (used in) provided by operating activities for the first three months of the current fiscal year compared with the prior year period reflected the changes in inventory and auto loans receivable, as discussed above, partially offset by the impact of volume and timing-related changes in accounts payable.Investing Activities.  During the first three months of fiscal 2024, net cash used in investing activities totaled $136.8 million compared with $99.0 million in fiscal 2023.  Capital expenditures were $136.7 million in the current year period versus $94.8 million in the prior year period.  Capital expenditures primarily included land purchases and construction costs to support our growth capacity initiatives and new store openings as well as investments in technology.  We maintain a multi-year pipeline of sites to support our store and capacity growth, so portions of capital spending in one year may relate to stores that we open in subsequent fiscal years.  As of May 31, 2023, 158 of our 241 used car stores were located on owned sites and 83 were located on leased sites, including 27 land-only leases and 56 land and building leases. Financing Activities.  During the first three months of fiscal 2024, net cash provided by financing activities totaled $306.6 million compared with net cash used in financing activities of $455.0 million in the prior year period.  Included in these amounts were net issuances of non-recourse notes payable of $419.7 million compared with $297.4 million in the prior year period.  Non-recourse notes payable are typically used to fund changes in auto loans receivable (see “Operating Activities”).  During the first three months of fiscal 2024, cash provided by financing activities was impacted by net payments on our long-term debt of $102.8 million.  During the first three months of fiscal 2023, cash used in financing activities was impacted by net payments on our long-term debt of $585.9 million as well as stock repurchases of $163.0 million.
Borrowings under our $2.00 billion unsecured revolving credit facility are available for working capital and general corporate purposes, and the unused portion is fully available to us.  In June 2023, the credit facility was amended to extend the maturity date to June 2028 with no other material changes to the terms of the agreement.  The credit facility, term loans and senior note agreements contain representations and warranties, conditions and covenants.  If these requirements are not met, all amounts outstanding or otherwise owed could become due and payable immediately and other limitations could be placed on our ability to use any available borrowing capacity.  As of May 31, 2023, we were in compliance with these financial covenants.See Note 9 for additional information on our revolving credit facility, term loans, senior notes and financing obligations.CAF auto loans receivable are primarily funded through our warehouse facilities and asset-backed term funding transactions.  These non-recourse funding vehicles are structured to legally isolate the auto loans receivable, and we would not expect to be able to access the assets of our non-recourse funding vehicles, even in insolvency, receivership or conservatorship proceedings.  Similarly, the investors in the non-recourse notes payable have no recourse to our assets beyond the related receivables, the amounts on deposit in reserve accounts and the restricted cash from collections on auto loans receivable.  We do, however, continue to have the rights associated with the interest we retain in these non-recourse funding vehicles. As of May 31, 2023, $12.54 billion and $4.24 billion of non-recourse notes payable were outstanding related to asset-backed term funding transactions and our warehouse facilities, respectively.  During the first three months of fiscal 2024, we funded a total of $1.50 billion in asset-backed term funding transactions.  As of May 31, 2023, we had $1.36 billion of unused capacity in our warehouse facilities. We have periodically increased our warehouse facility limit over time, as our store base, sales and CAF loan originations have grown.  See Note 9 for additional information on the warehouse facilities. We generally repurchase the receivables funded through our warehouse facilities when we enter into an asset-backed term funding transaction.  If our counterparties were to refuse to permit these repurchases it could impact our ability to execute on our funding program.  Additionally, the agreements related to the warehouse facilities include various representations and warranties, as well as covenants and performance triggers related to events of default.  If these requirements are not met, we could be unable to continue to fund receivables through the warehouse facilities.  In addition, warehouse facility investors could charge us a higher rate of interest and could have us replaced as servicer.  Further, we could be required to deposit collections on the related receivables with the warehouse facility agents on a daily basis and deliver executed lockbox agreements to the warehouse facility agents. The timing and amount of stock repurchases are determined based on stock price, market conditions, legal requirements and other factors.  Shares repurchased are deemed authorized but unissued shares of common stock.  As of May 31, 2023, a total of $4 billion of board authorizations for repurchases was outstanding, with no expiration date, of which $2.45 billion remained available for repurchase.  We paused the repurchase of our common stock during the third quarter of fiscal 2023 but may resume share repurchases at any time in the future depending on market conditions and our capital needs, among other factors.  We remain committed to returning capital back to our shareholders over time.  See Note 10 for more information on share repurchase activity.
We recognize money market securities, mutual fund investments, certain equity investments and derivative instruments at fair value.  See Note 6 for more information on fair value measurements.
We caution readers that the statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact, including statements about our future business plans, operations, capital structure, opportunities, or prospects, including without limitation any statements or factors regarding expected operating capacity, sales, inventory, market share, online purchases of vehicles from consumers, gross profit per used unit, revenue, margins, expenditures, liquidity, loan originations, CAF income, stock repurchases, indebtedness, earnings, market conditions or expectations with regards to the continued impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, are forward-looking statements made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.  You can identify these forward-looking statements by the use of words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “outlook,” “plan,” “positioned,” “predict,” “target,” “should,” “will” and other similar expressions, whether in the negative or affirmative.  Such forward-looking statements are based upon management’s current knowledge, expectations and assumptions and involve risks and uncertainties and assumptions about future events and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from anticipated results.  We disclaim any intent or obligation to update these statements.  Among the factors that could cause actual results and outcomes to differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements are the following:•Changes in the competitive landscape and/or our failure to successfully adjust to such changes.•Changes in general or regional U.S. economic conditions, including inflationary pressures, climbing interest rates and the potential impact of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.•Changes in the availability or cost of capital and working capital financing, including changes related to the asset-backed securitization market.•Events that damage our reputation or harm the perception of the quality of our brand.•Significant changes in prices of new and used vehicles.•A reduction in the availability of or access to sources of inventory or a failure to expeditiously liquidate inventory.•Our inability to realize the benefits associated with our omni-channel initiatives and strategic investments.•Factors related to geographic and sales growth, including the inability to effectively manage our growth.•Our inability to recruit, develop and retain associates and maintain positive associate relations.•The loss of key associates from our store, regional or corporate management teams or a significant increase in labor costs.•Changes in economic conditions or other factors that result in greater credit losses for CAF’s portfolio of auto loans receivable than anticipated. •The failure or inability to realize the benefits associated with our strategic transactions.•The effect and consequences of the Coronavirus (“COVID-19”) public health crisis on matters including U.S. and local economies; our business operations and continuity; the availability of corporate and consumer financing; the health and productivity of our associates; the ability of third-party providers to continue uninterrupted service; and the regulatory environment in which we operate.•Changes in consumer credit availability provided by our third-party finance providers.•Changes in the availability of extended protection plan products from third-party providers.•The performance of the third-party vendors we rely on for key components of our business.•Adverse conditions affecting one or more automotive manufacturers, and manufacturer recalls.•The inaccuracy of estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our financial statements, or the effect of new accounting requirements or changes to U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.•The failure or inability to adequately protect our intellectual property.•The occurrence of severe weather events.•Factors related to the geographic concentration of our stores.•Security breaches or other events that result in the misappropriation, loss or other unauthorized disclosure of confidential customer, associate or corporate information.•The failure of or inability to sufficiently enhance key information systems.•Factors related to the regulatory and legislative environment in which we operate.•The effect of various litigation matters.•The volatility in the market price for our common stock.For more details on factors that could affect expectations, see Part II, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” on Page 46 of this report, our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended February 28, 2023, and our quarterly or current reports as filed with or furnished to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”).  Our filings are publicly available on our investor information home page at investors.carmax.com.  Requests for information may also be made to our Investor Relations Department by email to investor_relations@carmax.com or by calling 1-804-747-0422, ext. 7865.  We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements after the date they are made, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.