
The following analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements.
This discussion and analysis contains certain forward-looking statements about our future performance. These statements are based on management’s assumptions and beliefs in light of the information currently available to it. Such statements are indicated by words such as “achieve,” “affect,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “committed,” “confidence,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “future,” “guidance,” “intended,” “maintain,” “may,” “model,” “plan,” “positions,” “program,” “strategy,” “target,” “trend,” “will,” and “would,” and similar words or phrases. These forward-looking statements are subject to uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially. These include the specific risk factors identified in “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for our last fiscal year and any subsequent filings, as well as those identified in this Form 10-Q.Various uncertainties and other factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. These include:●The extent to which our sources of liquidity are sufficient to meet our requirements may be affected by the state of the financial markets and the effect that such condition has on our ability to issue commercial paper at acceptable rates. Our ability to borrow under our committed lines of credit, including our bank credit facilities, could be impaired if one or more of our lenders under those lines is unwilling or unable to honor its contractual obligation to lend to us, or in the event that global pandemics, including the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic (including any variant), natural disasters or weather conditions interfere with the ability of our lenders to lend to us. Our ability to refinance maturing debt may be affected by the state of the financial markets.●Our ability to achieve sales, earnings and incremental FIFO operating profit goals may be affected by: the risks relating to or arising from our proposed transaction with Albertsons announced in October 2022, including, among others, our ability to consummate the proposed transaction, including on the terms of the merger agreement, on the anticipated timeline, and/or with the required regulatory approvals; COVID-19 pandemic related factors, risks and challenges; labor negotiations; potential work stoppages; changes in the unemployment rate; pressures in the labor market; changes in government-funded benefit programs; changes in the types and numbers of businesses that compete with us; pricing and promotional activities of existing and new competitors, including non-traditional competitors, and the aggressiveness of that competition; our response to these actions; the state of the economy, including interest rates, the current inflationary environment and future potential inflationary and/or deflationary trends and such trends in certain commodities, products and/or operating costs; the geopolitical environment including the war in Ukraine; unstable political situations and social unrest; changes in tariffs; the effect that fuel costs have on consumer spending; volatility of fuel margins; manufacturing commodity costs; supply constraints; diesel fuel costs related to our logistics operations; trends in consumer spending; the extent to which our customers exercise caution in their purchasing in response to economic conditions; the uncertainty of economic growth or recession; stock repurchases; changes in the regulatory environment in which we operate; our ability to retain pharmacy sales from third party payors; consolidation in the healthcare industry, including pharmacy benefit managers; our ability to negotiate modifications to multi-employer pension plans; natural disasters or adverse weather conditions; the effect of public health crises or other significant catastrophic events; the potential costs and risks associated with potential cyber-attacks or data security breaches; the success of our future growth plans; the ability to execute our growth strategy and value creation model, including continued cost savings, growth of our alternative profit businesses, and our ability to better serve our customers and to generate customer loyalty and sustainable growth through our strategic pillars of fresh, Our Brands, personalization, and seamless; and the successful integration of merged companies and new partnerships.
●Our ability to achieve these goals may also be affected by our ability to manage the factors identified above. Our ability to execute our financial strategy may be affected by our ability to generate cash flow.●Our effective tax rate may differ from the expected rate due to changes in tax laws, the status of pending items with various taxing authorities and the deductibility of certain expenses.Statements elsewhere in this report and below regarding our expectations, projections, beliefs, intentions or strategies are forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. While we believe that the statements are accurate, uncertainties about the general economy, our labor relations, our ability to execute our plans on a timely basis and other uncertainties described in this report and other reports that we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission could cause actual results to differ materially.  We assume no obligation to update the information contained in this report unless required by applicable law.
Kroger’s proven value creation model is allowing us to deliver today and invest for the future. The foundation of our value creation model is our omnichannel food retail business, which is built on Kroger’s strategic assets: our stores, digital ecosystem, Our Brands and our data. These assets, when combined with our go-to-market strategy, deliver a compelling value proposition for our customers. We continue to build long-term customer loyalty through Fresh, Our Brands, Personalization and our seamless shopping experience to drive sustainable sales growth in our retail supermarket business, including fuel and health and wellness. This, in turn, generates the data and traffic that enables our fast growing, high operating margin alternative profit businesses. We are evolving from primarily a food retailer into a more diverse, food first business that we expect will consistently deliver net earnings growth in the future. This will be achieved by:●Growing identical sales without fuel. Our plan involves maximizing growth opportunities in our supermarket business and is supported by continued strategic investments in our customers, associates, and our seamless ecosystem to ensure we deliver a full, friendly and fresh experience for every customer, every time. As more and more customers incorporate ecommerce into their permanent routines, we expect digital sales to grow at a double-digit rate – a faster pace than other food at home sales – over time; and●Expanding operating margin, through a balanced model where strategic price investments for our customers, investments in our associates’ wages and benefits and investments in technology that deliver a better associate and customer experience are offset by (i) our cost savings program, which has delivered $1 billion in cost savings annually for the past five fiscal years, (ii) improving our product mix, as we accelerate momentum with our Fresh and Our Brands initiatives, and (iii) growing our alternative profit businesses.We expect to continue to generate strong free cash flow and are committed to being disciplined with capital deployment in support of our value creation model and stated capital allocation priorities. Our first priority is to invest in the business through attractive high return opportunities that drive long-term sustainable net earnings growth. We are committed to maintaining our current investment grade debt rating and our net total debt to adjusted EBITDA ratio target range of 2.30 to 2.50. We also expect to continue to grow our dividend over time and return excess cash to shareholders via stock repurchases, subject to Board approval. During the third quarter of 2022, we paused our share repurchase program to prioritize de-leveraging following the proposed merger with Albertsons.We expect our value creation model will result in total shareholder return within our target range of 8% to 11% over time, which does not contemplate the effect of the proposed merger with Albertsons.
We achieved solid financial results and strong free cash flow in the first quarter of 2023, guided by the execution of our Leading with Fresh and Accelerating with Digital strategy.  Our results demonstrate the durability of our business model in a more challenged operating environment, as more customers are feeling the effects of inflation and economic uncertainty.  We are growing customer households by providing fresh products at affordable prices with personalized rewards. Our associates are bringing this strategy to life every day by delivering a full, friendly and fresh shopping experience with zero compromise on quality, selection and convenience.  The investments we are making in our associates, customers and technology to drive our go-to-market strategy are fueling our growth including in Alternative Profit businesses.Looking forward, our go-to-market strategy positions us well in a wide range of economic environments to continue to deliver for our customers, invest in our associates and achieve sustainable and attractive returns for shareholders.  The investments we have made over recent years to deliver for our customers and strengthen our value creation flywheel give us the confidence to reaffirm our full-year identical sales without fuel and adjusted net earnings per diluted share guidance.The following table provides highlights of our financial performance:
Notable items for the first quarter of 2023 are:
●Net earnings attributable to The Kroger Co. per diluted common share of $1.32, which represents a 47% increase compared to the first quarter of 2022.  ●Adjusted net earnings attributable to The Kroger Co. per diluted common share of $1.51, which represents a 4% increase compared to the first quarter of 2022.●Achieved operating profit of $1.5 billion, which is consistent with the first quarter of 2022.●Achieved adjusted FIFO operating profit of $1.7 billion, which represents a 4% increase compared to the first quarter of 2022.●Generated cash from operations of $2.9 billion, which represents a 160% increase compared to the first quarter of 2022.●Cash and temporary cash investments increased by $1.6 billion from $1.0 billion as of fiscal year end 2022 to $2.6 billion as of May 20, 2023.●Returned $188 million to shareholders through dividend payments.
●Identical sales, excluding fuel, increased 3.5%, which included total sales growth in Our Brands categories of 4.9%. Identical sales, excluding fuel, would have grown 5.0% in the first quarter of 2023 if not for the reduction in pharmacy sales from the previously communicated termination of our agreement with Express Scripts effective December 31, 2022. In the first quarter of 2023, the terminated agreement had a positive effect on our FIFO Gross Margin Rate, excluding fuel, and a negative effect on our OG&A Rate, excluding fuel and the 2023 Adjusted Items, as defined below. The overall net effect on FIFO operating profit was slightly positive.   ●Digital sales increased 15%, which was led by the strength of our Pickup solutions, which grew by 11%, and our Delivery solutions, which grew by 30%.  Pickup solutions growth was driven by our focus on associate training, which resulted in improvements to the customer experience.  Delivery solutions growth was driven by our Boost membership program and expansion of our Kroger Delivery network.  Digital sales include products ordered online and picked up at our stores and our Delivery and Ship solutions. Our Delivery solutions include orders delivered to customers from retail store locations, customer fulfillment centers powered by Ocado and orders placed through third-party platforms. Our Ship solutions primarily include online orders placed through our owned platforms that are dispatched using mail service or third-party courier.●We are currently operating in a volatile inflationary environment and we have started to see year-over-year inflation levels moderate, particularly in fresh categories. Our LIFO charge for the first quarter of 2023 was $99 million, compared to $93 million in the first quarter of 2022. Our LIFO charge reflects our expected annualized product cost inflation for 2023.
●During the first quarter of 2023, we opened one additional Kroger Delivery customer fulfillment center powered by Ocado’s automated smart platform in Frederick, Maryland.●During the first quarter of 2023, we recognized legal settlement costs of $62 million, the net present value of the $68 million settlement of all pending and future opioid litigation claims with the State of West Virginia. The settlement amount is payable over 10 years and $49 million net of tax. This amount was excluded from our adjusted FIFO operating profit and adjusted net earnings results to reflect the unique and non-recurring nature of the charge. This settlement is not an admission of wrongdoing or liability by Kroger. We will continue to vigorously defend against other claims and lawsuits relating to opioids. This settlement is based on a set of unique and specific facts relating to West Virginia, and we do not believe that the settlement amount or any other terms of our agreement with West Virginia can or should be extrapolated to any other opioid-related cases pending against us. It is our view that this settlement is not a reliable proxy for the outcome of any other cases or the overall level of our exposure.
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements, including the related notes, are presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We provide non-GAAP measures, including First-In, First-Out (“FIFO”) gross margin, FIFO operating profit, adjusted FIFO operating profit, adjusted net earnings and adjusted net earnings per diluted share because management believes these metrics are useful to investors and analysts.  These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered as an alternative to gross margin, operating profit, net earnings and net earnings per diluted share or any other GAAP measure of performance.  These measures should not be reviewed in isolation or considered as a substitute for our financial results as reported in accordance with GAAP.We calculate FIFO gross margin as FIFO gross profit divided by sales. FIFO gross profit is calculated as sales less merchandise costs, including advertising, warehousing, and transportation expenses, but excluding the Last-In, First-Out (“LIFO”) charge. Merchandise costs exclude depreciation and rent expenses. FIFO gross margin is an important measure used by management and management believes FIFO gross margin is a useful metric to investors and analysts because it measures the merchandising and operational effectiveness of our go-to-market strategy.We calculate FIFO operating profit as operating profit excluding the LIFO charge. FIFO operating profit is an important measure used by management and management believes FIFO operating profit is a useful metric to investors and analysts because it measures the operational effectiveness of our financial model.The adjusted net earnings, adjusted net earnings per diluted share and adjusted FIFO operating profit metrics are important measures used by management to compare the performance of core operating results between periods. We believe adjusted net earnings, adjusted net earnings per diluted share and adjusted FIFO operating profit are useful metrics to investors and analysts because they present more accurate year-over-year comparisons of our net earnings, net earnings per diluted share and FIFO operating profit because adjusted items are not the result of our normal operations.  Net earnings for the first quarter of 2023 include the following, which we define as the “2023 Adjusted Items”:●Charges to operating, general and administrative expenses (“OG&A”) of $40 million, $34 million net of tax, for merger related costs and $62 million, $49 million net of tax, for legal settlement costs (the “2023 OG&A Adjusted Items”).●Losses in other income (expense) of $78 million, $59 million net of tax, for the unrealized loss on investments (the “2023 Other Income (Expense) Adjusted Item”).
Net earnings for the first quarter of 2022 include the following, which we define as the “2022 Adjusted Items”:●Charges to OG&A of $7 million, $6 million net of tax, for the revaluation of Home Chef contingent consideration (the “2022 OG&A Adjusted Item”).●Losses in other income (expense) of $532 million, $404 million net of tax, for the unrealized loss on investments (the “2022 Other Income (Expense) Adjusted Item”).Please refer to the “Net Earnings per Diluted Share excluding the Adjusted Items” table below for reconciliations of certain non-GAAP financial measures reported in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q to the most comparable GAAP financial measures and related disclosure.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net earnings attributable to The Kroger Co. to adjusted net earnings attributable to The Kroger Co. and a reconciliation of net earnings attributable to The Kroger Co. per diluted common share to adjusted net earnings attributable to The Kroger Co. per diluted common share, excluding the 2023 and 2022 Adjusted Items:
(1)The amounts presented represent the after-tax effect of each adjustment, which was calculated using discrete tax rates.(2)The pre-tax adjustment for loss on investments was $78 in the first quarter of 2023 and $532 in the first quarter of 2022.(3)The pre-tax adjustment for Home Chef contingent consideration was $7.(4)The pre-tax adjustment for merger related costs was $40.  Merger related costs primarily include third-party professional fees and the amortization of credit facility fees associated with the proposed merger with Albertsons.(5)The pre-tax adjustment for legal settlement costs was $62.(6)The amount presented represents the net earnings per diluted common share effect of each adjustment.
(1)This column represents the percentage change in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.(2)This column represents the percentage change in the first quarter of 2022, compared to the first quarter of 2021.(3)Digital sales are included in the “Total sales to retail customers without fuel” line above. Digital sales include products ordered online and picked up at our stores and our Delivery and Ship solutions. Our Delivery solutions include orders delivered to customers from retail store locations, customer fulfillment centers powered by Ocado and orders placed through third-party platforms. Our Ship solutions primarily include online orders placed through our owned platforms that are dispatched using mail service or third-party courier.  Digital sales increased approximately 15% in the first quarter of 2023 and decreased approximately 6% in the first quarter of 2022.  The increase in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, was led by the strength of our Pickup solutions, which grew by 11%, and our Delivery solutions, which grew by 30%.  Pickup solutions growth was driven by our focus on associate training, which resulted in improvements to the customer experience.  Delivery solutions growth was driven by our Boost membership program and expansion of our Kroger Delivery network.(4)Other sales primarily relate to external sales at food production plants, data analytic services and third-party media revenue. The increase in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, is primarily due to an increase in data analytic services and third-party media revenue. Total sales increased in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, by 1.3%. The increase was primarily due to an increase in total sales to retail customers without fuel, partially offset by a reduction in supermarket fuel sales.  Total sales, excluding fuel, increased 3.5% in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, which was primarily due to our identical sales increase, excluding fuel, of 3.5%.  Identical sales, excluding fuel, for the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, increased primarily due to an increase in the number of households shopping with us and an increase in basket value due to retail inflation, partially offset by a reduction in the number of items in basket and the termination of our agreement with Express Scripts.  Identical sales, excluding fuel, would have grown 5.0% in the first quarter of 2023 if not for the approximately $575 million reduction in pharmacy sales from the previously communicated termination of our agreement with Express Scripts effective December 31, 2022.  Total supermarket fuel sales decreased 13.5% in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to a decrease in the average retail fuel price of 11.2% and a decrease in fuel gallons sold of 2.5%, which was consistent with the market decline in fuel gallons sold. The decrease in the average retail fuel price was caused by a decrease in the product cost of fuel.
We calculate identical sales, excluding fuel, as sales to retail customers, including sales from all departments at identical supermarket locations, Kroger Specialty Pharmacy businesses and Delivery and Ship solutions. We define a supermarket as identical when it has been in operation without expansion or relocation for five full quarters. We define Kroger Specialty Pharmacy businesses as identical when physical locations have been in operation continuously for five full quarters; discontinued patient therapies are excluded from the identical sales calculation starting in the quarter of transfer or termination. We define Kroger Delivery identical sales powered by Ocado based on geography. We include Kroger Delivery sales powered by Ocado as identical if the delivery occurs in an existing Kroger supermarket geography. If the Kroger Delivery sales powered by Ocado occur in a new geography, these sales are included as identical when deliveries have occurred to the new geography for five full quarters. Although identical sales is a relatively standard term, numerous methods exist for calculating identical sales growth. As a result, the method used by our management to calculate identical sales may differ from methods other companies use to calculate identical sales. It is important to understand the methods used by other companies to calculate identical sales before comparing our identical sales to those of other such companies. Our identical sales results, excluding fuel, are summarized in the following table. We used the identical sales, excluding fuel, dollar figures presented below to calculate percentage changes for the first quarter of 2023.
(1)This column represents the percentage change in identical sales in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.(2)This column represents the percentage change in identical sales in the first quarter of 2022, compared to the first quarter of 2021.
We define gross margin as sales minus merchandise costs, including advertising, warehousing, and transportation.  Rent expense, depreciation and amortization expense, and interest expense are not included in gross margin.Our gross margin rate, as a percentage of sales, was 22.33% for the first quarter of 2023, compared to 21.63% for the first quarter of 2022.  This increase in rate was achieved while also investing in price to maintain a competitive price position and deliver greater value for our customers.  The increase in rate in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, resulted primarily from decreased fuel sales, which have a lower gross margin rate, Our Brands performance, our ability to effectively manage product cost inflation through strong sourcing practices, lower transportation costs, as a percentage of sales, and the effect of our terminated agreement with Express Scripts, partially offset by higher shrink, as a percentage of sales, and increased promotional price investments.Our LIFO charge was $99 million in the first quarter of 2023, compared to $93 million in the first quarter of 2022.  Our LIFO charge reflects our expected annualized product cost inflation for 2023.Our FIFO gross margin rate, which excludes the LIFO charge, was 22.55% in the first quarter of 2023, compared to 21.84% in the first quarter of 2022. Our fuel sales lower our FIFO gross margin rate due to the very low FIFO gross margin rate, as a percentage of sales, of fuel sales compared to non-fuel sales. Excluding the effect of fuel, our FIFO gross margin rate increased 21 basis points in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.  This increase in rate was achieved while also investing in price to maintain a competitive price position and deliver greater value for our customers.  This increase resulted primarily from Our Brands performance, our ability to effectively manage product cost inflation through strong sourcing practices, lower transportation costs, as a percentage of sales, and the effect of our terminated agreement with Express Scripts, partially offset by higher shrink, as a percentage of sales, and increased promotional price investments.
​Operating, General and Administrative Expenses​OG&A expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs such as wages, healthcare benefit costs, retirement plan costs, utilities and credit card fees.  Rent expense, depreciation and amortization expense, and interest expense are not included in OG&A.​OG&A expenses, as a percentage of sales, were 16.37% in the first quarter of 2023 and 15.69% in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, resulted primarily from the effect of decreased fuel sales, which increases our OG&A rate, as a percentage of sales, planned investments in associates, the effect of our terminated agreement with Express Scripts, costs related to strategic investments in various margin expansion initiatives that will drive future growth and the 2023 OG&A Adjusted Items, partially offset by the effect of supermarket sales leverage, which decreases our OG&A rate, as a percentage of sales, the 2022 OG&A Adjusted Items and broad-based improvement from cost savings initiatives that drive administrative efficiencies, store productivity and sourcing cost reductions.​Our fuel sales lower our OG&A rate, as a percentage of sales, due to the very low OG&A rate, as a percentage of sales, of fuel sales compared to non-fuel sales. Excluding the effect of fuel, the 2023 OG&A Adjusted Items and the 2022 OG&A Adjusted Items, our OG&A rate increased 14 basis points in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022. This increase resulted primarily from planned investments in associates, the effect of our terminated agreement with Express Scripts and costs related to strategic investments in various margin expansion initiatives that will drive future growth, partially offset by the effect of supermarket sales leverage, which decreases our OG&A rate, as a percentage of sales, and broad-based improvement from cost savings initiatives that drive administrative efficiencies, store productivity and sourcing cost reductions.​Rent Expense​Rent expense remained relatively consistent, as a percentage of sales, for the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.​Depreciation and Amortization Expense​Depreciation and amortization expense increased, as a percentage of sales, in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.  This increase was primarily due to depreciation of equipment recorded under finance leases related to our Kroger Delivery customer fulfillment center location openings, additional depreciation on capital investments, excluding mergers and lease buyouts, of $3.5 billion during the rolling four quarter period ending with the first quarter of 2023 and a decrease in the average useful life on these capital investments.​Operating Profit and FIFO Operating Profit​Operating profit was $1.5 billion, or 3.3% of sales, for the first quarter of 2023, compared to $1.5 billion, or 3.4% of sales, for the first quarter of 2022. Operating profit, as a percentage of sales, decreased 12 basis points in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, due to increased OG&A and depreciation and amortization expenses, as a percentage of sales, partially offset by a higher FIFO gross margin rate.  Fuel earnings contributed to our operating profit growth for the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.​FIFO operating profit was $1.6 billion, or 3.5% of sales, for the first quarter of 2023, compared to $1.6 billion, or 3.6% of sales, for the first quarter of 2022. FIFO operating profit, as a percentage of sales, excluding the 2023 and 2022 Adjusted Items, increased 10 basis points in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, due to a higher FIFO gross margin rate, partially offset by increased OG&A and depreciation and amortization expenses, as a percentage of sales.  Fuel earnings contributed to our FIFO operating profit growth for the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.​Specific factors contributing to the trends driving operating profit and FIFO operating profit identified above are discussed earlier in this section.​24
The following table provides a reconciliation of operating profit to FIFO operating profit, and to Adjusted FIFO operating profit, excluding the 2023 and 2022 Adjusted Items:
(1)Merger related costs primarily include third-party professional fees and the amortization of credit facility fees associated with the proposed merger with Albertsons.
Interest expense decreased for the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.  This decrease was primarily due to increased interest income earned on our cash and temporary cash investments due to rising interest rates and an increase in our investments balance in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022.
The effective income tax rate was 22.9% in the first quarter of 2023 and 18.0% for the first quarter of 2022. The effective income tax rate for the first quarter of 2023 differed from the federal statutory rate due to the effect of state income taxes, partially offset by the utilization of tax credits and deductions. The effective income tax rate for the first quarter of 2022 differed from the federal statutory rate due to the utilization of tax credits and deductions, partially offset by the effect of state income taxes. The effective income tax rate increased in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to a decrease in deductions from share-based payments.
Our net earnings are based on the factors discussed in the Results of Operations section.Net earnings of $1.32 per diluted share for the first quarter of 2023 represented an increase of 47% compared to net earnings of $0.90 per diluted share for the first quarter of 2022. Adjusted net earnings of $1.51 per diluted share for the first quarter of 2023 represented an increase of 4% compared to adjusted net earnings of $1.45 per diluted share for the first quarter of 2022.  The increase in adjusted net earnings per diluted share resulted primarily from increased FIFO operating profit, excluding fuel, and increased fuel earnings, partially offset by higher income tax expense.
The following table summarizes our net increase (decrease) in cash and temporary cash investments for the first quarters of 2023 and 2022:
Net cash provided by operating activitiesWe generated $2.9 billion of cash from operations in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $1.1 billion in the first quarter of 2022.  Net earnings including noncontrolling interests, adjusted for non-cash items, generated approximately $2.4 billion of operating cash flow in both the first quarters of 2023 and 2022.  Cash provided (used) by operating activities for changes in operating assets and liabilities, including working capital, was $502 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to ($1.3) billion in the first quarter of 2022. The increase in cash provided by operating activities for changes in operating assets and liabilities, including working capital, was primarily due to the following:●A decrease in pharmacy receivables at the end of the first quarter of 2023, compared to fiscal year end 2022, primarily due to timing of cash receipts and the termination of our agreement with Express Scripts;●Cash flows for FIFO inventory were more favorable in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to the following:oA decrease in FIFO inventory at the end of the first quarter of 2023, compared to fiscal year end 2022, primarily related to maintaining inventory at optimal levels through improved inventory management planning; andoAn increase in FIFO inventory at the end of the first quarter of 2022, compared to fiscal year end 2021, primarily due to rising costs resulting from continued inflationary cost pressures and a reduction of supply chain constraints; ●An increase in certain non income-based tax accruals at the end of the first quarter of 2023, compared to fiscal year end 2022, primarily due to timing of payments; and●A decrease in income taxes receivable at the end of the first quarter of 2023, compared to fiscal year end 2022, primarily due to applying our outstanding income tax receivable to reduce our estimated tax payments for the first quarter of 2023.Cash paid for taxes decreased in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to applying our outstanding income tax receivable to reduce our estimated tax payments for the first quarter of 2023.Net cash used by investing activitiesInvesting activities used cash of $947 million in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $723 million in the first quarter of 2022.  The amount of cash used by investing activities increased in the first quarter of 2023, compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to increased payments for property and equipment, partially offset by increased proceeds from the sale of assets.
Net cash used by financing activitiesWe used $296 million of cash for financing activities in the first quarter of 2023 compared to $818 million in the first quarter of 2022.  The amount of cash used for financing activities decreased in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to the following:●Decreased treasury stock purchases; partially offset by●Decreased proceeds from issuance of capital stock.
Capital investments, excluding mergers, acquisitions and the purchase of leased facilities, totaled $1.1 billion for the first quarter of 2023, compared to $971 million for the first quarter of 2022.  During the rolling four quarter period ended with the first quarter of 2023, we opened, expanded, relocated or acquired 11 supermarkets and also completed 117 major within-the-wall remodels.  We define a major remodel as a project that exceeds a cost of $20 per square foot.  Total supermarket square footage at the end of the first quarter of 2023 remained consistent with the end of the first quarter of 2022.  Excluding mergers, acquisitions and operational closings, total supermarket square footage at the end of the first quarter of 2023 increased 0.3% over the end of the first quarter of 2022.
As of May 20, 2023, we maintained a $2.75 billion (with the ability to increase by $1.25 billion), unsecured revolving credit facility that, unless extended, terminates on July 6, 2026. Outstanding borrowings under the credit facility, commercial paper borrowings and some outstanding letters of credit reduce funds available under the credit facility. As of May 20, 2023, we had no outstanding commercial paper and no borrowings under our revolving credit facility. The outstanding letters of credit that reduce funds available under our credit facility totaled $1 million as of May 20, 2023.In connection with the proposed merger with Albertsons, on October 13, 2022, we entered into a commitment letter with certain lenders pursuant to which the lenders have committed to provide a 364-day $17.4 billion senior unsecured bridge term loan facility. The commitments are intended to be drawn to finance the proposed merger with Albertsons only to the extent we do not arrange for alternative financing prior to closing. As alternative financing for the proposed merger is secured, the commitments with respect to the bridge term loan facility under the commitment letter will be reduced.On November 9, 2022, we executed a term loan credit agreement with certain lenders pursuant to which the lenders committed to provide, contingent upon the completion of the proposed merger with Albertsons and certain other customary conditions to funding, (1) senior unsecured term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $3.0 billion maturing on the third anniversary of the proposed merger closing date and (2) senior unsecured term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $1.75 billion maturing on the date that is 18 months after the proposed merger closing date (collectively, the “Term Loan Facilities”). Borrowings under the Term Loan Facilities will be used to pay a portion of the consideration and other amounts payable in connection with the proposed merger with Albertsons. The duration of the Term Loan Facilities will allow us to achieve our net total debt to adjusted EBITDA ratio target range of 2.30 to 2.50 within the first 18 to 24 months after the proposed merger closing date. The entry into the term loan credit agreement reduced the commitments under our bridge facility commitment letter from $17.4 billion to $12.65 billion. Borrowings under the Term Loan Facilities will bear interest at rates that vary based on the type of loan and our debt rating.Our bank credit facility contains a financial covenant.  As of May 20, 2023, we were in compliance with the financial covenant.  Furthermore, management believes it is not reasonably likely that we will fail to comply with the financial covenant in the foreseeable future.Total debt, including both the current and long-term portions of obligations under finance leases, increased $55 million as of May 20, 2023, compared to our fiscal year end 2022 debt of $13.4 billion. This increase resulted primarily from a net increase in obligations under finance leases of $59 million, which was primarily related to our one additional Kroger Delivery customer fulfillment center opening during the first quarter of 2023.
​Common Share Repurchase Programs​During the first quarter of 2023, we invested $29 million to repurchase six hundred and two thousand Kroger common shares at an average price of $47.68 per share.  The shares repurchased in the first quarter of 2023 were reacquired under a share repurchase program that uses the cash proceeds from the exercises of stock options by participants in Kroger’s stock option, long-term incentive plans and the associated tax benefits.​On September 9, 2022, our Board of Directors approved a $1.0 billion share repurchase program to reacquire shares via open market purchase or privately negotiated transactions, block trades, or pursuant to trades intending to comply with Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act (the “September 2022 Repurchase Program”). No shares have been repurchased under the September 2022 authorization. During the third quarter of 2022, we paused our share repurchase program to prioritize de-leveraging following the proposed merger with Albertsons.​Liquidity Needs​We held cash and temporary cash investments of $2.6 billion as of the end of May 20, 2023, which reflects our elevated operating performance over the last few years. We actively manage our cash and temporary cash investments in order to internally fund operating activities, support and invest in our core businesses, make scheduled interest and principal payments on our borrowings and return cash to shareholders through cash dividend payments and share repurchases. Our current levels of cash, borrowing capacity and balance sheet leverage provide us with the operational flexibility to adjust to changes in economic and market conditions. We remain committed to our dividend, and growing our dividend over time, subject to Board approval, as well as share repurchase programs and we will evaluate the optimal use of any excess free cash flow, consistent with our capital allocation strategy.​We expect to meet our short-term and long-term liquidity needs with cash and temporary cash investments on hand as of May 20, 2023, cash flows from our operating activities and other sources of liquidity, including borrowings under our commercial paper program and bank credit facility. Our short-term and long-term liquidity needs include anticipated requirements for working capital to maintain our operations, pension plan commitments, interest payments and scheduled principal payments of debt and commercial paper, settlement of interest rate swap liabilities, servicing our lease obligations, self-insurance liabilities, capital investments and other purchase obligations. We may also require additional capital in the future to fund organic growth opportunities, additional customer fulfillment centers, joint ventures or other business partnerships, property development, acquisitions, dividends and share repurchases. In addition, we generally operate with a working capital deficit due to our efficient use of cash in funding operations and because we have consistent access to the capital markets. We believe we have adequate coverage of our debt covenants to continue to maintain our current investment grade debt ratings and to respond effectively to competitive conditions.​As previously disclosed, on October 13, 2022, we entered into a merger agreement with Albertsons. We expect to meet our liquidity needs for the proposed merger with cash and temporary cash investments on hand as of the merger closing date, cash flows from our operating activities and other sources of liquidity, including borrowings under our commercial paper program, senior notes issuances, bank credit facility and other sources of financing. In connection with the proposed merger, we entered into a commitment letter for a bridge term loan facility and executed a term loan credit agreement. For additional information about the proposed merger with Albertsons, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.​For additional information about our debt activity in the first quarter of 2023, see Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.​CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES​We have chosen accounting policies that we believe are appropriate to report accurately and fairly our operating results and financial position, and we apply those accounting policies in a consistent manner.  Our critical accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 28, 2023.​28
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and other factors we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could vary from those estimates.  There has been no material change to our critical accounting estimates since the filing of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 28, 2023.