
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the condensed consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, and other financial information included in this Form 10-Q.  Certain statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are forward-looking statements.  See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
We view each of our Integrated Resort properties as an operating segment.  Our operating segments in Macao consist of The Venetian Macao; The Londoner Macao; The Parisian Macao; The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao; and the Sands Macao.  Our operating segment in Singapore is Marina Bay Sands.
From 2020 through the beginning of 2023, our operations in Macao were negatively impacted by the reduction in travel and tourism related to the COVID-19 pandemic.  The Macao government's policy regarding the management of COVID-19 and general travel restrictions was relaxed in late December 2022 and early January 2023.  Since then, visitation to our Macao Integrated Resorts and operations have improved.The Macao government announced total visitation from mainland China to Macao increased approximately 59.5% and decreased approximately 60.6%, during the two months ended February 28, 2023 (the latest statistics currently available), as compared to the same period in 2022 and 2019 (pre-pandemic), respectively.  The Macao government also announced gross gaming revenue increased approximately 94.9% and decreased approximately 54.5%, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022 and 2019, respectively.
From 2020 through early 2022, our operations in Singapore were negatively impacted by the reduction in travel and tourism related to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, the Vaccinated Travel Framework (“VTF”), launched in April 2022, facilitated the resumption of travel for all travelers, including short-term visitors, which has had and continues to have a positive impact on operations at Marina Bay Sands.  Airlift passenger movement has increased with 8.37 million passengers having passed through Singapore's Changi Airport in January and February 2023 (the latest statistics currently available), an increase of 488% and a decrease of 22% compared to the same period in 2022 and 2019, respectively.Visitation to Marina Bay Sands continues to improve since the travel restrictions have been lifted. The Singapore Tourism Board (“STB”) announced total visitation to Singapore increased from approximately 246,000 in 2022 to 2.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, while visitation decreased 37.9% when compared to the same period in 2019.
While the disruptions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have subsided, given the dynamic nature of these circumstances, the potential future impact on our consolidated results of operations, cash flows and financial condition is uncertain.  However, we have a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity in place, including total unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $6.53 billion and access to $1.50 billion, $537 million and $444 million of available borrowing capacity from our LVSC Revolving Facility, 2018 SCL Revolving Facility and 2012 Singapore Revolving Facility, respectively, as of March 31, 2023. We believe we are able to support continuing operations and complete our major construction projects that are underway.
For a discussion of our significant accounting policies and estimates, please refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” presented in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed on February 3, 2023.There were no newly identified significant accounting estimates during the three months ended March 31, 2023, nor were there any material changes to the critical accounting policies and estimates discussed in our 2022 Annual Report.
See related disclosure at “Item 1 — Financial Statements — Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements — Note 1 — Organization and Business of Company — Recent Accounting Pronouncements.”
Operating revenues at The Venetian Macao, The Londoner Macao, The Parisian Macao, The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao and Marina Bay Sands are dependent upon the volume of patrons who stay at the hotel, which affects the price charged for hotel rooms and our gaming volume.  Operating revenues at Sands Macao are principally driven by the volume of gaming patrons who visit the property on a daily basis. Management utilizes the following volume and pricing measures in order to evaluate past performance and assist in forecasting future revenues.  The various volume measurements indicate our ability to attract patrons to our Integrated Resorts.  In casino operations, win and hold percentages indicate the amount of revenue to be expected based on volume.  In hotel operations, average daily rate and revenue per available room indicate the demand for rooms and our ability to capture that demand.  In mall operations, base rent per square foot indicates our ability to attract and maintain profitable tenants for our leasable space.The following are the key measurements we use to evaluate operating revenues:Casino revenue measurements for Macao and Singapore: Macao and Singapore table games are segregated into two groups: Rolling Chip play (composed of VIP players) and Non-Rolling Chip play (mostly non-VIP players).  The volume measurement for Rolling Chip play is non-negotiable gaming chips wagered and lost.  The volume measurement for Non-Rolling Chip play is table games drop (“drop”), which is net markers issued (credit instruments), cash deposited in the table drop boxes and gaming chips purchased and exchanged at the cage.  Rolling Chip and Non-Rolling Chip volume measurements are not comparable as they are two distinct measures of volume.  The amounts wagered and lost for Rolling Chip play are substantially higher than the amounts dropped for Non-Rolling Chip play.  Slot handle, also a volume measurement, is the gross amount wagered for the period cited.We view Rolling Chip win as a percentage of Rolling Chip volume, Non-Rolling Chip win as a percentage of drop and slot hold (amount won by the casino) as a percentage of slot handle.  Win or hold percentage represents the percentage of Rolling Chip volume, Non-Rolling Chip drop or slot handle that is won by the casino and recorded as casino revenue.  Our win and hold percentages are calculated before discounts, commissions, deferring revenue associated with our loyalty programs and allocating casino revenues related to goods and services provided to patrons on a complimentary basis.  Our Rolling Chip table games are expected to produce a win percentage of 3.15% to 3.45% in Macao and Singapore, and our Non-Rolling Chip table games have produced a trailing 12-month win percentage of 24.6%, 22.0%, 23.2%, 23.0%, 17.3% and 18.8% at The Venetian Macao, The Londoner Macao, The Parisian Macao, The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao, Sands Macao and Marina Bay Sands, respectively.  Our slot machines have produced a trailing 12-month hold percentage of 4.4%, 3.9%, 4.1%, 9.1%, 3.4% and 4.3% at The Venetian Macao, The Londoner Macao, The Parisian Macao, The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao, Sands Macao and Marina Bay Sands, respectively.  Actual win and hold percentages may vary from our expected win percentage and the trailing 12-month win and hold percentages.  Generally, slot machine play is conducted on a cash basis.  In Macao and Singapore, 10.5% and 14.0%, respectively, of our table games play was conducted on a credit basis for the three months ended March 31, 2023.Hotel revenue measurements: Performance indicators used are occupancy rate (a volume indicator), which is the average percentage of available hotel rooms occupied during a period and average daily room rate (“ADR,” a price indicator), which is the average price of occupied rooms per day.  Available rooms exclude those rooms unavailable for occupancy during the period due to renovation, development or other requirements (such as government mandated closure, lodging for team members and usage by the Macao government for quarantine measures).  The calculations of the occupancy rate and ADR include the impact of rooms provided on a complimentary basis.  Revenue per available room (“RevPAR”) represents a summary of hotel ADR and occupancy.  Because not all available rooms are occupied, ADR is normally higher than RevPAR.  Reserved rooms where the guests do not show up for their stay and lose their deposit, or where guests check out early, may be re-sold to walk-in guests.Mall revenue measurements: Occupancy, base rent per square foot and tenant sales per square foot are used as performance indicators.  Occupancy represents gross leasable occupied area (“GLOA”) divided by gross leasable area (“GLA”) at the end of the reporting period.  GLOA is the sum of: (1) tenant occupied space under lease and (2) tenants no longer occupying space, but paying rent.  GLA does not include space currently under development or not on the market for lease.  Base rent per square foot is the weighted average base or minimum rent charge in effect at the end of the reporting period for all tenants that would qualify to be included in occupancy.  Tenant sales per square foot is the reported comparable sales for the trailing 12 months divided by the comparable square footage for the same period.  Only tenants that have been open for a minimum of 12 months are included in the tenant sales per square foot calculation.
In late December 2022 and early January 2023, the China, Macao and Hong Kong governments lifted most COVID-19 restrictions, which resulted in increased visitation in Macao and the surrounding regions.  In April 2022, COVID-19 restrictions in Singapore were eased, which resulted in increased visitation to Marina Bay Sands. Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023, were $2.12 billion, compared to $943 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  Operating income was $378 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to an operating loss of $302 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  Net income from continuing operations was $145 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to a net loss from continuing operations of $478 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The reopening of more borders and elimination of most pandemic-related restrictions in Macao and elimination of restrictions in Singapore positively impacted our financial results.
Our net revenues consisted of the following:
Consolidated net revenues were $2.12 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, an increase of $1.18 billion compared to $943 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was due to increases of $728 million and $449 million at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively.Net casino revenues increased $914 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was due to increases of $589 million and $325 million at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively.  The elimination of COVID-19 restrictions in Macao beginning in late December 2022 and elimination of restrictions in April 2022 in Singapore led to increased visitation and table games and slot volumes.  The following table summarizes the results of our casino activity:
In our experience, average win percentages remain fairly consistent when measured over extended periods of time with a significant volume of wagers, but can vary considerably within shorter time periods as a result of the statistical variances associated with games of chance in which large amounts are wagered.Room revenues increased $148 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increases in occupancy rates and ADR driven by increased visitation resulted in increases of $89 million and $59 million at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The following table summarizes the results of our room activity:
(1)    During the three months ended March 31, 2023, rooms that were out of service due to labor resource shortages were included in the 2023 hotel statistics. (2)    During the three months ended March 31, 2023, approximately 500 rooms were under construction for renovation purposes.Food and beverage revenues increased $71 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increased business volume at food and beverage outlets and in banquet operations resulted in increases of $48 million and $23 million at Marina Bay Sands and our Macao operations, respectively. Mall revenues increased $13 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was due to increases of $9 million in Macao, driven by a decrease in rent concessions granted to our mall tenants, and $4 million at Marina Bay Sands, driven by an increase in base rent and a decrease in rent concessions. For further information related to the financial performance of our malls, see “Additional Information Regarding our Retail Mall Operations.”  The following table summarizes the results of our malls on the Cotai Strip in Macao and in Singapore:
Note:    This table excludes the results of our retail outlets at Sands Macao.  As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, tenants were provided rent concessions during the three months ended March 31, 2022.  Base rent per square foot presented above excludes the impact of these rent concessions.(1)    Tenant sales per square foot is the sum of reported comparable sales for the trailing 12 months divided by the comparable square footage for the same period.Convention, retail and other revenues increased $31 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was due to an $18 million increase at our Macao operations, primarily driven by increases of $8 million in ferry operations due to the resumption of ferry services in January 2023, $5 million in retail and other  revenues (e.g., limo and spa), and $3 million in entertainment revenue driven by increases in visitation.  In addition, a $13 million increase at Marina Bay Sands was driven primarily by increases of $6 million in convention revenue and $6 million in other revenues (e.g., museum, SkyPark, and transportation).
Our operating expenses consisted of the following:
Operating expenses were $1.74 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, an increase of $497 million compared to $1.25 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily driven by increases of $406 million in casino expenses, $39 million in food and beverage expenses, and $33 million in general and administrative expenses.Casino expenses increased $406 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was primarily attributable to increases of $286 million and $86 million in gaming taxes at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively, consistent with increased casino revenues, increases in gaming tax rates of 1% in Macao and 3% in Singapore, and a 1% increase in value added tax in Singapore.Room expenses increased $13 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was attributable to increases of $7 million and $6 million at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively, consistent with increased room revenues. Food and beverage expenses increased $39 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was due to increases of $33 million and $6 million at Marina Bay Sands and our Macao operations, respectively, primarily driven by increased food outlet and banquet volumes.Convention, retail and other expenses increased $17 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily driven by increases of $9 million and $6 million at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively.  The increases were primarily driven by increases of $7 million in ferry operation expenses due to the resumption of ferry services in January 2023, $3 million in entertainment expenses due to increased event volume, $2 million in convention expenses and $1 million in retail expenses.Recovery of credit losses was $6 million for three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to a provision for credit losses of $4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The $10 million decrease was primarily driven by collections on Macao casino receivables that were fully reserved for.  The amount of this provision can vary over short periods of time because of factors specific to the patrons who owe us money from gaming activities.  We believe the amount of our provision for credit losses in the future will depend upon the state of the economy, our credit standards, our risk assessments and the judgment of our employees responsible for granting credit.General and administrative expenses increased $33 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase was primarily due to increases of $26 million and $7 million at Marina Bay Sands and our Macao operations, respectively, driven by increases in payroll and marketing costs, utilities and property taxes.Development expenses were $42 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $60 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the costs were associated with our evaluation and pursuit of new business opportunities, primarily in New York, Texas and digital gaming related efforts.  Development costs are expensed as incurred.Loss on disposal or impairment of assets was $14 million for three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $6 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The losses incurred for the three months ended March 31, 2023, were primarily due to $8 million in demolition costs related to the renovation at Marina Bay Sands and a $6 million disposal at our Macao operations.  The losses incurred for the three months ended March 31, 2022 were primarily due to asset disposals related to aircraft parts of $4 million and asset disposal and demolition costs, primarily at The Londoner Macao, Venetian Macao and Sands Macao.
The following table summarizes information related to our segments:
(1)    Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, is used by management as the primary measure of the operating performance of our segments.  Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA is net income (loss) from continuing operations before stock-based compensation expense, corporate expense, pre-opening expense, development expense, depreciation and amortization, amortization of leasehold interests in land, gain or loss on disposal or impairment of assets, interest, other income or expense, gain or loss on modification or early retirement of debt and income taxes.  Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure used by management, as well as industry analysts, to evaluate operations and operating performance.  In particular, management utilizes consolidated adjusted property EBITDA to compare the operating profitability of its operations with those of its competitors, as well as a basis for determining certain incentive compensation.  Integrated Resort companies have historically reported adjusted property EBITDA as a supplemental performance measure to GAAP financial measures.  In order to view the operations of their properties on a more stand-alone basis, Integrated Resort companies, including Las Vegas Sands Corp., have historically excluded certain expenses that do not relate to the management of specific properties, such as pre-opening expense, development expense and corporate expense, from their adjusted property EBITDA calculations.  Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA should not be interpreted as an alternative to income from operations (as an indicator of operating performance) or to cash flows from operations (as a measure of liquidity), in each case, as determined in accordance with GAAP.  We have significant uses of cash flow, including capital expenditures, dividend payments, interest payments, debt principal repayments and income taxes, which are not reflected in consolidated adjusted property EBITDA.  Not all companies calculate adjusted property EBITDA in the same manner.  As a result, our presentation of consolidated adjusted property EBITDA may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
(a)During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we recorded stock-based compensation expense of $22 million and $14 million, respectively, of which $11 million and $9 million, respectively, was included in corporate expense in the accompanying condensed consolidated statements of operations. Adjusted property EBITDA at our Macao operations increased $409 million compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to increases in casino, room, food and beverage and mall revenues due to increased visitation at our Macao properties driven by the elimination of most COVID-19 restrictions in late December 2022 and early January 2023.Adjusted property EBITDA at Marina Bay Sands increased $273 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to increases in casino, room, food and beverage and mall revenues due to the reopening of borders and elimination of most pandemic-related restrictions in April 2022.
The following table summarizes information related to interest expense:
Interest cost increased $62 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily resulting from an increase in our weighted average total debt balance due to $999 million drawn on the SCL Revolving Facility during the twelve months ended March 31, 2023.  The weighted average interest rate increased from 4.2% to 5.4% during the three months ended March 31, 2023 when compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily driven by the increase in the underlying benchmark rates on our SCL Revolving Facility and our Singapore Credit Facility, and the increase in interest rates on the SCL senior notes as a result of the credit rating downgrade to BB+ by S&P in February 2022, and by Fitch in June 2022.
Interest income was $70 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  Interest income during the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily attributed to $63 million in interest income on money market funds and bank deposits driven by an increase in cash due to the sale of the Las Vegas properties in February 2022 and higher market interest rates.  We also had $7 million in interest income on the seller financing loan provided in connection with the sale of the Las Vegas properties.Other expense was $35 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $22 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  Other expense during the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily attributable to foreign currency transaction losses driven by the U.S. dollar-denominated debt held by Sands China Ltd (“SCL”). Our income tax expense was $50 million on income before income taxes of $195 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, resulting in an 25.6% effective income tax rate.  This compares to a 0.4% effective income tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The income tax expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, reflects a 17% statutory tax rate on our Singapore operations and a 21% corporate income tax on our domestic operations.  Our operations in Macao are subject to a 12% statutory income tax rate, but in connection with the 35% gaming tax, our subsidiaries in Macao and their peers received an income tax exemption on gaming operations through December 31, 2022.  Our income tax expense is based on our estimated annual effective tax rate for the year applied to year-to-date operating results in accordance with interim accounting guidelines.We have had the benefit of a corporate tax exemption in Macao, which exempts us from paying the 12% corporate income tax on profits generated by the operation of casino games, but does not apply to our non-gaming activities.  We continued to benefit from this tax exemption through December 31, 2022.  Additionally, we entered into a shareholder dividend tax agreement with the Macao government in April 2019, effective through June 26, 2022, providing an annual payment as a substitution for a 12% tax otherwise due from VML shareholders on dividend distributions paid from VML gaming profits.  In December 2022, we requested a corporate tax exemption on profits generated by the operation of casino games in Macao for the new gaming concession period effective from January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2032, or for a period of corporate tax exemption that the Chief Executive of Macao may deem more appropriate.  We are evaluating the timing of an application for a new shareholder dividend tax agreement.  There is no assurance either of these arrangements will be granted.The net loss attributable to our noncontrolling interests was $2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $101 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  These amounts are related to the noncontrolling interest of SCL.
We own and operate retail malls at our Integrated Resorts at The Venetian Macao, The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao, The Londoner Macao, The Parisian Macao and Marina Bay Sands.  Management believes being in the retail mall business and, specifically, owning some of the largest retail properties in Asia will provide meaningful value for us, particularly as the retail market in Asia continues to grow.Our malls are designed to complement our other unique amenities and service offerings provided by our Integrated Resorts.  Our strategy is to seek out desirable tenants that appeal to our patrons and provide a wide variety of shopping options.  We generate our mall revenues primarily from leases with tenants through minimum base rents, overage rents, and reimbursements for common area maintenance (“CAM”) and other expenditures.The following tables summarize the results of our mall operations on the Cotai Strip and at Marina Bay Sands for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Note:  This table excludes the results of our retail outlets at Sands Macao.(1)Minimum rents include base rents and straight-line adjustments of base rents.(2)Rent concessions were provided to tenants as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact on mall operations.(3)Commercial property that generates rental income is exempt from property tax for the first six years for newly constructed buildings in Cotai.  If the property also qualifies for Tourism Utility Status, the property tax exemption can be extended to twelve years with effect from the opening of the property.  The exemption for The Venetian Macao and The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao expired, and the exemption for The Londoner Macao and The Parisian Macao will be expiring in December 2027 and September 2028, respectively.(4)Mall-related expenses consist of CAM, marketing fees and other direct operating expenses, property taxes and provision for credit losses, but excludes depreciation and amortization and general and administrative costs.It is common in the mall operating industry for companies to disclose mall net operating income (“NOI”) as a useful supplemental measure of a mall’s operating performance.  Because NOI excludes general and administrative expenses, interest expense, impairment losses, depreciation and amortization, gains and losses from property dispositions, allocations to noncontrolling interests and provision for income taxes, it provides a performance measure that, when compared year over year, reflects the revenues and expenses directly associated with owning and operating commercial real estate properties and the impact on operations from trends in occupancy rates, rental rates and operating costs.In the tables above, we believe taking total mall revenues less mall-related expenses provides an operating performance measure for our malls.  Other mall operating companies may use different methodologies for deriving mall-related expenses.  As such, this calculation may not be comparable to the NOI of other mall operating companies.
We regularly evaluate opportunities to improve our product offerings, such as refreshing our meeting and convention facilities, suites and rooms, retail malls, restaurant and nightlife mix and our gaming areas, as well as other anticipated revenue-generating additions to our Integrated Resorts.
In April 2019, our wholly owned subsidiary, Marina Bay Sands Pte. Ltd. (“MBS”) and the STB entered into a development agreement (the “Second Development Agreement”) pursuant to which MBS has agreed to construct a development, which will include a hotel tower with luxury rooms and suites, a rooftop attraction, convention and meeting facilities and a state-of-the-art live entertainment arena with approximately 15,000 seats (the “MBS Expansion Project”). The Second Development Agreement provides for a total minimum project cost of approximately 4.50 billion Singapore dollars (“SGD,” approximately $3.39 billion at exchange rates in effect on March 31, 2023).  The estimated cost and timing of the total project will be updated as we complete design and begin construction.  We expect the total project cost will materially exceed the amounts referenced above from April 2019 based on current market conditions due to inflation, higher material and labor costs and other factors.  We have incurred approximately $1.05 billion as of March 31, 2023, inclusive of the payment made in 2019 for the lease of the parcels of land underlying the MBS Expansion Project site.  On March 22, 2023, MBS and the STB entered into a supplemental agreement (the “Supplemental Agreement”), which further extended the construction commencement date to April 8, 2024 and the construction completion date to April 8, 2028, and allowed for changes to the construction and operation plans under the Second Development Agreement.  We amended our 2012 Singapore Credit Facility to provide for the financing of the development and construction costs, fees and other expenses related to the MBS Expansion Project pursuant to the Second Development Agreement.  On September 7, 2021, we amended the 2012 Singapore Credit Facility, which, among other things, extended the deadline for delivering the construction cost estimate and the construction schedule for the MBS Expansion Project to March 31, 2022.  As noted above, we are in the process of completing the design and reviewing the budget and timing of the MBS expansion due to various factors.  As a result, the construction cost estimate and construction schedule were not delivered to the lenders by the extended deadline, and we will not be permitted to make further draws on the Singapore Delayed Draw Term Facility until these items are delivered.  We do not anticipate material spend related to the MBS Expansion Project prior to the delivery of these items to lenders.We are also accomplishing the approximately $1.0 billion renovation of Marina Bay Sands, which will introduce world-class suites in Tower 1 and Tower 2, and substantially upgrade the overall guest experience for premium customers.  This project is in addition to our previously announced plans for the MBS Expansion Project and is expected to be completed by the end of 2023.
Under the Concession, we are required to invest a minimum of 30.24 billion patacas (approximately $3.74 billion at exchange rates in effect on March 31, 2023), in certain gaming and non-gaming projects in Macao by December 2032.  The specific investments to be carried out are determined annually by VML and proposed to the Macao government for approval.  These investments will be in connection with, among others, attracting international visitors to Macao, conventions and exhibitions, entertainment shows, sporting events, culture and art, health and wellness, themed attractions, supporting Macao’s position as a city of gastronomy, and increasing community and maritime tourism.  We expect to invest 27.80 billion patacas (approximately $3.44 billion at exchange rates in effect on March 31, 2023) in non-gaming projects.  VML submitted the list of investments and projects it intends to carry out in 2023 to the Macao government on March 31, 2023 and is currently pending their approval.
We continue to evaluate additional development projects in each of our markets and pursue new development opportunities globally.
Our cash flows consisted of the following:
Table games play at our properties is conducted on a cash and credit basis, while slot machine play is primarily conducted on a cash basis.  Our rooms, food and beverage and other non-gaming revenues are conducted primarily on a cash basis and to a lesser extent as a trade receivable.  Operating cash flows are generally affected by changes in operating income, accounts receivable, gaming related liabilities and interest payments.  Cash flows from operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $941 million as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.  The increase in cash generated from operations was primarily due to our Macao and Singapore operations generating increased operating income driven by the acceleration of visitation and the elimination of most pandemic-related restrictions in Singapore, beginning in April 2022, and in Macao, beginning in late December 2022, partially offset by increased receivables due to greater casino revenues.
Capital expenditures for the three months ended March 31, 2023, totaled $166 million.  Included in this amount was $115 million for construction activities at Marina Bay Sands in Singapore and $38 million for construction and development activities in Macao, which consisted of $24 million for The Londoner Macao, $11 million for The Venetian Macao, $2 million for The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao and $1 million for Sands Macao.  Additionally, this amount included $13 million for corporate and other costs.Capital expenditures for the three months ended March 31, 2022, totaled $137 million.  Included in this amount was $84 million for construction and development activities in Macao, which consisted primarily of $67 million for The Londoner Macao, $14 million for The Venetian Macao and $2 million for The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao.  Additionally, this amount included $50 million at Marina Bay Sands in Singapore and $3 million for corporate and other costs.
Net cash flows used in financing activities were $36 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, which was primarily attributable to $17 million in repayments on long-term debt and $17 million in other financial liability payments.Net cash flows generated from financing activities were $5.17 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022, which was primarily attributable to the net proceeds from the sale of the Las Vegas properties of $4.89 billion.  Additionally, $201 million was received from the drawdown of our SCL revolving facility.  These items were partially offset by $17 million in repayments on long-term debt and $9 million in deferred offering costs relating to obtaining LVSC Revolving Facility lender consents to consummate the Las Vegas sale.
We fund our development projects primarily through borrowings from our debt instruments and operating cash flows.Our U.S., SCL and Singapore credit facilities, as amended, contain various financial covenants, which include maintaining a maximum leverage ratio, as defined per the respective facility agreements.  As of March 31, 2023, our U.S. and Singapore leverage ratios, as defined per the respective credit facility agreements, were 3.2x and 2.4x, respectively, compared to the maximum leverage ratios allowed of 4.0x and 4.5x, respectively.  If we are unable to maintain compliance with the financial covenants under these credit facilities, we would be in default under the respective credit facilities.In November 2022, SCL entered into a waiver and amendment request letter, pursuant to which lenders, among other things, waived SCL’s requirement to ensure the leverage ratio does not exceed 4.0x and the interest coverage ratio is greater than 2.50x, through July 31, 2023.  The 2018 SCL Credit Facility expires on July 31, 2023; however, we believe we will be successful in extending the maturity date of the facility prior to its expiration.  If we are unable to extend the maturity date or refinance the 2018 SCL Credit Facility, we would be required to seek alternative forms of capital to repay the outstanding balance and our available liquidity may be reduced.On January 30, 2023, LVSC entered into the Fourth Amendment with lenders to the LVSC Revolving Credit Agreement.  Pursuant to the Fourth Amendment, the existing LVSC Revolving Credit Agreement was amended to (a) determine consolidated adjusted EBITDA on a year-to-date annualized basis during the period commencing on the effective date and ending on and including December 31, 2023, as follows: (i) for the fiscal quarter ending March 31, 2023, consolidated adjusted EBITDA for such fiscal quarter multiplied by four, (ii) for the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2023, consolidated adjusted EBITDA for such fiscal quarter and the immediately preceding fiscal quarter multiplied by two, and (iii) for the fiscal quarter ending September 30, 2023, consolidated adjusted EBITDA for such fiscal quarter and the two immediately preceding fiscal quarters, multiplied by four-thirds; (b) extend the period during which LVSC is required to maintain a specified amount of minimum liquidity as of the last day of each month to December 31, 2023; and (c) extend the period during which LVSC is unable to declare or pay any dividend or other distribution, unless liquidity is greater than $1.0 billion on a pro forma basis after giving effect to such dividend or distribution, to December 31, 2023.We held unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of approximately $6.53 billion and restricted cash of approximately $124 million as of March 31, 2023, which approximately $2.67 billion of the unrestricted amount is held by non-U.S. subsidiaries.  Of the $2.67 billion, approximately $2.09 billion is available to be repatriated, either in the form of dividends or via intercompany loans or advances, to the U.S., subject to levels of earnings, cash flow generated from gaming operations and various other factors, including dividend requirements to third-party public stockholders in the case of funds being repatriated from SCL, compliance with certain local statutes, laws and regulations currently applicable to our subsidiaries and restrictions in connection with their contractual arrangements.  We do not expect withholding taxes or other foreign income taxes to apply should these earnings be distributed in the form of dividends or otherwise.We believe the unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $6.53 billion and cash flow generated from operations, as well as the $2.48 billion available for borrowing under our U.S., SCL and Singapore revolving credit facilities, net of outstanding letters of credit, and SGD 3.69 billion (approximately $2.78 billion at exchange rates in effect on March 31, 2023) under our Singapore Delayed Draw Term Facility as of March 31, 2023 (only available for draws after the construction cost estimate and construction schedule for the MBS Expansion Project have been delivered to the lenders), will be sufficient to maintain compliance with the financial covenants of our credit facilities and fund our working capital needs, committed and planned capital expenditures, development opportunities and debt obligations.  In the normal course of our activities, we will continue to evaluate global capital markets to consider future opportunities for enhancements of our capital structure.We have suspended our quarterly dividend program beginning in April 2020, and SCL suspended its dividend payments after paying its interim dividend for 2019 on February 21, 2020.We believe we have a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity in place, including access to available borrowing capacity under our credit facilities.  We also believe we are well positioned to support our continuing operations, complete the major construction projects underway and meet our commitments under the Macao Concession.
This report contains forward-looking statements made pursuant to the Safe Harbor Provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.  These forward-looking statements include the discussions of our business strategies and expectations concerning future operations, margins, profitability, liquidity and capital resources.  In addition, in certain portions included in this report, the words: “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “seeks,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends” and similar expressions, as they relate to our Company or management, are intended to identify forward-looking statements.  Although we believe these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot assure you any forward-looking statements will prove to be correct.  These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors beyond our control, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These factors include, among others, the risks associated with:•our ability to maintain our Concession in Macao and gaming license in Singapore;•our ability to invest in future growth opportunities; •the ability to execute our previously announced capital expenditure programs in Singapore, and produce future returns;•general economic and business conditions internationally, which may impact levels of disposable income, consumer spending, group meeting business, pricing of hotel rooms and retail and mall tenant sales;•uncertainty about the pace of recovery of travel and tourism in Asia from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic;•disruptions or reductions in travel and our operations due to natural or man-made disasters, pandemics, epidemics or outbreaks of infectious or contagious diseases, political instability, civil unrest, terrorist activity or war;•the uncertainty of consumer behavior related to discretionary spending and vacationing at our Integrated Resorts in Macao and Singapore;•the extensive regulations to which we are subject and the costs of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations;•new developments and construction projects and ventures, including development at our existing properties (for example, development at our Cotai Strip properties and the MBS Expansion Project);•regulatory policies in China or other countries in which our patrons reside, or where we have operations, including visa restrictions limiting the number of visits or the length of stay for visitors from China to Macao, restrictions on foreign currency exchange or importation of currency, and the judicial enforcement of gaming debts;•the possibility that the laws and regulations of mainland China become applicable to our operations in Macao and Hong Kong;•the possibility that economic, political and legal developments in Macao adversely affect our Macao operations, or that there is a change in the manner in which regulatory oversight is conducted in Macao;•our leverage, debt service and debt covenant compliance, including the pledge of certain of our assets (other than our equity interests in our subsidiaries) as security for our indebtedness and ability to refinance our debt obligations as they come due or to obtain sufficient funding for our planned, or any future, development projects;•fluctuations in currency exchange rates and interest rates, and the possibility of increased expense as a result;•increased competition for labor and materials due to planned construction projects in Macao and Singapore and quota limits on the hiring of foreign workers;•our ability to compete for limited management and labor resources in Macao and Singapore, and policies of those governments that may also affect our ability to employ imported managers or labor from other countries;•our dependence upon properties primarily in Macao and Singapore for all of our cash flow and the ability of our subsidiaries to make distribution payments to us;•the passage of new legislation and receipt of governmental approvals for our operations in Macao and Singapore and other jurisdictions where we are planning to operate;•the ability of our insurance coverage to cover all possible losses that our properties could suffer and the potential for our insurance costs to increase in the future;•our ability to collect gaming receivables from our credit players;•the collectability of our outstanding loan receivable;•our dependence on chance and theoretical win rates;•fraud and cheating;•our ability to establish and protect our intellectual property rights;•reputational risk related to the license of certain of our trademarks;•the possibility that our securities may be prohibited from being traded in the U.S. securities market under the Holding Foreign Companies Accountable Act;•conflicts of interest that arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors and officers of SCL;•government regulation of the casino industry (as well as new laws and regulations and changes to existing laws and regulations), including gaming license regulation, the requirement for certain beneficial owners of our securities to be found suitable by gaming authorities, the legalization of gaming in other jurisdictions and regulation of gaming on the internet;•increased competition in Macao, including recent and upcoming increases in hotel rooms, meeting and convention space, retail space, potential additional gaming licenses and online gaming;•the popularity of Macao and Singapore as convention and trade show destinations;•new taxes, changes to existing tax rates or proposed changes in tax legislation;•the continued services of our key officers;•any potential conflict between the interests of our Principal Stockholders and us;•labor actions and other labor problems;•our failure to maintain the integrity of our information and information systems or comply with applicable privacy and data security requirements and regulations could harm our reputation and adversely affect our business;•the completion of infrastructure projects in Macao;•limitations on the transfers of cash to and from our subsidiaries, limitations of the pataca exchange markets and restrictions on the export of the renminbi;•the outcome of any ongoing and future litigation; and•potential negative impacts from environmental, social and governance and sustainability matters.All future written and verbal forward-looking statements attributable to us or any person acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section.  New risks and uncertainties arise from time to time, and it is impossible for us to predict these events or how they may affect us.  Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements.  We assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements after the date of this report as a result of new information, future events or developments, except as required by federal securities laws.Investors and others should note we announce material financial information using our investor relations website (https://investor.sands.com), our company website, SEC filings, investor events, news and earnings releases, public conference calls and webcasts.  We use these channels to communicate with our investors and the public about our company, our products and services, and other issues.In addition, we post certain information regarding SCL, a subsidiary of Las Vegas Sands Corp. with ordinary shares listed on The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited, from time to time on our company website and our investor relations website. It is possible the information we post regarding SCL could be deemed to be material information.The contents of these websites are not intended to be incorporated by reference into this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q or in any other report or document we file, and any reference to these websites are intended to be inactive textual references only.