
Certain statements contained in this quarterly report (or otherwise made by us or on our behalf from time to time in other reports, filings with the SEC, news releases, conferences, internet postings or otherwise) that are not statements of historical fact constitute “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, notwithstanding that such statements are not specifically identified. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements about our financial position, business strategy, competitive position, potential growth opportunities, potential operating performance improvements, the effects of competition, the effects of future legislation or regulations and plans and objectives of our management for future operations. We have based our forward-looking statements on our beliefs and assumptions considering the information available to us at the time the statements are made. Use of the words “may,” “should,” “continue,” “plan,” “potential,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “outlook,” “could,” “target,” “project,” “seek,” “predict,” or variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements but are not the exclusive means of identifying such statements.Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in such statements. Factors that could cause actual results to differ from those discussed in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those set forth below under Part II—Other Information—Item 1A.—Risk Factors, in Part I—Item IA.—Risk Factors of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as other factors described herein or in our annual, quarterly and other reports we file with the SEC (collectively, “cautionary statements”). Based upon changing conditions, should any risk or uncertainty that has already materialized, worsen in scope, impact or duration, or should one or more of the currently unrealized risks or uncertainties materialize, or should any underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those described in any forward-looking statements. All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the applicable cautionary statements. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date on which they are made. We do not intend to update these forward-looking statements, except as required by applicable law.
For the second year in a row, the first quarter was a record start to the year for the Company with exceptional fan demand across all our markets. Our overall revenue increased by 73% to $3.1 billion on a reported basis, or 76% growth on a constant currency basis as compared to the same period of the prior year. All three of our reporting segments had at least 40% revenue growth in the quarter. The most significant growth came from our Concerts segment as a result of increased shows, fans, and onsite spend and contributed to the success of our other divisions. Our operating income for the quarter improved by $116 million, from $27 million in the first quarter of 2022 to $143 million in the first quarter of 2023 due to higher performance from all three of our major business segments. The improvement in operating income was $121 million at constant currency.All of our markets and venues are now fully open, including Asia Pacific which had one of its busiest and most successful quarters in the first quarter of 2023. This, coupled with our event related deferred revenue balance of $4.4 billion as of March 31, 2023 and ongoing sales trends suggest continued strong demand for concerts, making us hopeful for continued success in the remainder of the year.All of the segment financial comments to follow are based on reported foreign currency exchange rates.Our Concerts segment revenue for the quarter increased by $1.1 billion, or 89%, from $1.2 billion in the first quarter of 2022 to $2.3 billion in the first quarter of 2023. The revenue growth was largely the result of more shows and fans coming back to venues to enjoy their favorite artists. The number of events for the first quarter of 2023 was approximately 9,600 compared to approximately 6,700 in the first quarter of 2022, an increase of 2,900 events or 43%. The number of fans for the quarter was 19.5 million compared to approximately 10.9 million last year, a growth of 8.6 million fans or 79%. The growth was largely in our international markets – in particular in Asia Pacific, mainland Europe and Latin America. Some of the larger acts touring in the first quarter included the Red Hot Chili Peppers, Harry Styles, BLACKPINK and RBD. While most of our on-site spend occurs during the summer season when our festival and amphitheater shows occur, we did see an increase in on-site per fan spending at our United States and United Kingdom theaters and clubs as well as our European arenas in the first quarter of 2023 as compared to the first quarter of 2022. Concerts operating loss for the quarter improved by $65 million, from a loss of $150 million in the first quarter of 2022 to $84 million in the first quarter of 2023.Our Ticketing segment revenue for the quarter increased by $197 million, or 41%, from $480 million in the first quarter of 2022 to $678 million in the first quarter of 2023. The improvement resulted from an increase in ticket sales, upward pricing momentum due to higher fan demand and higher non-service fee revenue. We sold approximately 73 million fee-bearing tickets in the first quarter of 2023 compared to 52 million tickets in the same period of the prior year, an increase of 41%. North America fee-bearing ticket volume increased by 38% in the quarter while International rose even more, by 48%. With GTV, North America increased by 54% on fee-bearing ticket sales while International rose by 86% compared to the same period last year. Pricing on our fee-bearing tickets increased by double-digits, reflecting strong consumer demand, particularly for premium seats and VIP experiences. Our resale business also continued to expand, with secondary GTV growing double digits in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the same period of the prior year. Ticketing operating income for the quarter improved by $66 million, from $155 million in the first quarter of 2022 to $221 million in the first quarter of 2023.Our Sponsorship & Advertising segment revenue for the quarter increased by $54 million, or 47%, from $116 million in the first quarter of 2022 to $170 million in the first quarter of 2023. The improvement was due to higher activations with our marketing partners driven by more high profile artists going on sale in more markets as well as re-opened venues in markets that were still shut-down in the first quarter of last year. Operating income for the quarter increased by $18 million, from $59 million in the first quarter of 2022 to income of $77 million in the first quarter of 2023.Serving artists remains at the center of our strategy and we work with them to continue improving the fan experience. Delivering on this priority includes our recently proposed Fair Ticketing Act, which is garnering industry support from talent agencies, brand managers and sports leagues. We are optimistic about the long-term potential of our Company and are focused on the key elements of our business model: expanding our concerts platform with more shows and fans in existing and new markets as well as improving the on-site experience for our fans by enhancing food and beverage products and premium service offerings. We will drive conversion of ticket sales through development of innovative products that support selling tickets to fans. Our ticket marketplaces have reduced friction in the ticket purchase experience and created additional revenue opportunities. In addition, we continue to grow our sponsorship and advertising partnerships and our clients are able to reach their customers via the powerful connection that live shows creates with ardent fans.
Revenue increased $1.3 billion during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year driven by increased revenue in our Concerts segment of $1.1 billion, Ticketing segment of $197.3 million and Sponsorship & Advertising of $54.4 million as further discussed within each segment’s operating results.
Operating income increased $115.7 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year primarily driven by increased operating income in our Concerts segment of $65.2 million, Ticketing segment of $66.1 million and Sponsorship & Advertising segment of $18.1 million as further discussed within each segment’s operating results, partially offset by higher Corporate expenses primarily due to lower compensation expense in the first quarter of 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and headcount growth as a result of the increased operating opportunities in 2023.
Interest expense increased $22.4 million, or 34%, during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year, primarily driven by the issuance of our 3.125% convertible senior notes due 2029 in January 2023.
Interest income increased $32.7 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year, primarily attributed to higher rate of return on our cash and cash equivalents in 2023 and increase in cash and cash equivalents.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we had a net tax expense of $23.8 million on income before income taxes of $68.0 million compared to a net tax expense of $11.7 million on a loss before income taxes of $37.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the income tax expense consisted of $20.3 million related to foreign entities, $0.5 million related to United States federal taxes, and $3.0 million related to state and local income taxes. The net increase in tax expense of $12.1 million was primarily due to profits in certain non-United States jurisdictions.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests increased $46.1 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year primarily due to higher operating results from certain concert and festival promotion businesses during the first three months of 2023 as compared to the prior year.
Our reportable segments are Concerts, Ticketing and Sponsorship & Advertising.
Revenue and related costs for events are generally deferred and recognized when the event occurs. All advertising costs incurred during the year for shows in future years are expensed at the end of the year. If a current year event is rescheduled into a future year, all advertising costs incurred to date are expensed in the period when the event is rescheduled.Concerts direct operating expenses include artist fees, event production costs, show-related marketing and advertising expenses, along with other costs.To judge the health of our Concerts segment, we primarily monitor the number of confirmed events and fan attendance in our network of operated and third-party venues, talent fees, average paid attendance, market ticket pricing, advance ticket sales and the number of major artist clients under management. In addition, at our operated venues and festivals, we monitor APF and premium ticket sales. For business that is conducted in foreign markets, we also compare the operating results from our foreign operations to prior periods without the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates.
Revenue related to ticketing service charges is recognized when the ticket is sold for our third-party clients. For our own events, where our concert promoters control ticketing, revenue is deferred and recognized when the event occurs. GTV represents the total amount of the transaction related to a ticket sale and includes the face value of the ticket as well as the service charge.Ticketing direct operating expenses include call center costs and credit card fees, along with other costs.To judge the health of our Ticketing segment, we primarily review the GTV and the number of tickets sold through our ticketing operations, the number of clients renewed or added and the average royalty rate paid to clients who use our ticketing services. In addition, we review the number of visits to our websites, cost of customer acquisition, the purchase conversion rate, and the per ticket non-service fee revenue streams. For business that is conducted in foreign markets, we also compare the operating results from our foreign operations to prior periods without the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates.
Revenue related to sponsorship and advertising programs is recognized over the term of the agreement or operating season as the benefits are provided to the sponsor unless the revenue is associated with a specific event, in which case it is recognized when the event occurs.Sponsorship & Advertising direct operating expenses include fulfillment costs related to our sponsorship programs, along with other costs.To judge the health of our Sponsorship & Advertising segment, we primarily review the revenue generated through sponsorship arrangements and online advertising, the percentage of expected revenue under contract, and what portion of our sponsorship business is driven by large multi-element, multi-year relationships. For business that is conducted in foreign markets, we also compare the operating results from our foreign operations to prior periods without the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates.
AOI margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate by dividing AOI by revenue. We use AOI margin to evaluate the performance of our operating segments. We believe that information about AOI margin assists investors by allowing them to evaluate changes in the operating results of our portfolio of businesses separate from non-operational factors that affect net income (loss), thus providing insights into both operations and the other factors that affect reported results. AOI margin is not calculated or presented in accordance with GAAP. A limitation of the use of AOI margin as a performance measure is that it does not reflect the periodic costs of certain amortizing assets used in generating revenue in our business. Accordingly, AOI margin should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, operating income (loss) margin, and other measures of financial performance reported in accordance with GAAP. Furthermore, this measure may vary among other companies; thus, AOI margin as presented herein may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies.
(1)Events generally represent a single performance by an artist. Fans generally represent the number of people who attend an event. Festivals are counted as one event in the quarter in which the festival begins, but the number of fans is based on the days the fans were present at the festival and thus can be reported across multiple quarters. Events and fan attendance metrics are estimated each quarter.(2)The fee-bearing tickets estimated above include primary and secondary tickets that are sold using our Ticketmaster systems or that we issue through affiliates. This includes primary tickets sold during the year regardless of event timing, except for our own events where our concert promoters control ticketing which are reported when the events occur. The non-fee-bearing tickets estimated above include primary tickets sold using our Ticketmaster systems, through season seat packages and our venue clients’ box offices, along with tickets sold on our “do it yourself” platform. These metrics are net of any refunds requested and any cancellations that occurred during the period, which may result in a negative number.
Our Concerts segment operating results were, and discussions of significant variances are, as follows:
Concerts revenue increased $1.1 billion during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year, primarily due to more shows and festivals in the Asia Pacific, Europe, and Latin America markets, which were largely closed during the first quarter of 2022. In addition, there was increased activity in the United States during the first quarter of 2023. Concerts had incremental revenue of $184.9 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 from acquisitions and new venues.
Concerts AOI increased $50.0 million and operating loss decreased $65.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year. The increase in AOI was primarily driven by increases in revenue associated with the higher number of shows and festivals discussed above. These increases were partially offset by related costs, including increased compensation expenses due to increased headcount as more markets were reopened compared to the prior period. The increase in operating income outside of AOI of $15.2 million is primarily associated to lower stock-based compensation of $22.0 million due to timing of grants partially offset by higher depreciation and amortization of $9.4 million for additional capital expenditures incurred to support the increased operations.
Our Ticketing segment operating results were, and discussions of significant variances are, as follows:
Ticketing revenue increased $197.3 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year. This increase is primarily due to higher primary and secondary sales volumes driven by more events on sale and upward pricing momentum due to more fan demand and artist mix in 2023 as compared to 2022.
Ticketing AOI increased by $64.8 million and operating income increased $66.1 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year. These increases was primarily driven by increased ticketing activity discussed above. These increases were partially offset by higher direct operating expenses to support the increased operations and enterprise growth as well as higher selling, general and administrative expenses attributable to increased compensation expenses from increased headcount as compared to the prior year.
Our Sponsorship & Advertising segment operating results were, and discussions of significant variances are, as follows:
Sponsorship & Advertising revenue increased $54.4 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year primarily driven by more client activations for artist onsales, new venue sponsorships, and activity in international markets that were not open in the first quarter of 2022.
Sponsorship & Advertising AOI increased $25.8 million and operating income increased $18.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year. These increases were primarily due to increased revenues from higher sponsorship activity discussed above and incremental operating income from acquisitions. The increases were partially offset by increases in direct operating expenses, including higher artist activation costs, and depreciation and amortization to support higher activity levels as compared to the prior year.
Our cash is centrally managed on a worldwide basis. Our primary short-term liquidity needs are to fund general working capital requirements, capital expenditures and debt service requirements while our long-term liquidity needs are primarily related to acquisitions and debt repayment. Our primary sources of funds for our short-term liquidity needs will be cash flows from operations and borrowings under our amended senior secured credit facility, while our long-term sources of funds will be from cash flows from operations, long-term bank borrowings and other debt or equity financings. We may from time to time engage in open market purchases of our outstanding debt securities or redeem or otherwise repay such debt.Our balance sheet reflects cash and cash equivalents of $7.0 billion at March 31, 2023 and $5.6 billion at December 31, 2022. Included in the March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022 cash and cash equivalents balances are $1.4 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively, of cash received that includes the face value of tickets sold on behalf of our ticketing clients and their share of service charges, which we refer to as client cash. We generally do not utilize client cash for our own financing or investing activities as the amounts are payable to clients on a regular basis. Our foreign subsidiaries held approximately $2.6 billion in cash and cash equivalents, excluding client cash, at March 31, 2023. We generally do not repatriate these funds, but if we did, we would need to accrue and pay United States state income taxes as well as any applicable foreign withholding or transaction taxes on future repatriations. We may from time to time enter into borrowings under our revolving credit facility. If the original maturity of these borrowings is 90 days or less, we present the borrowings and subsequent repayments on a net basis in the statement of cash flows to better represent our financing activities. Our balance sheet reflects total net debt of $6.6 billion and $5.9 billion, respectively, at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. Our weighted-average cost of debt, excluding unamortized debt discounts and debt issuance costs on our term loans and notes, was 4.7% at March 31, 2023, with approximately 87% of our debt at fixed rates.Our cash and cash equivalents are held in accounts managed by third-party financial institutions and consist of cash in our operating accounts and invested cash. Cash held in non-interest-bearing and interest-bearing operating accounts in many cases exceeds the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance limits. The invested cash is in interest-bearing funds consisting primarily of bank deposits and money market funds. While we monitor cash and cash equivalents balances in our operating accounts on a regular basis and adjust the balances as appropriate, these balances could be impacted if the underlying financial institutions fail. To date, we have experienced no loss or lack of access to our cash and cash equivalents; however, we can provide no assurances that access to our cash and cash equivalents will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets.For our Concerts segment, we often receive cash related to ticket revenue in advance of the event, which is recorded in deferred revenue until the event occurs. In the United States, this cash is largely associated with events in our operated venues, notably amphitheaters, festivals, theaters and clubs. Internationally, this cash is from a combination of both events in our operated venues, as well as events in third-party venues associated with our promoter’s share of tickets in allocation markets. With the exception of some upfront costs and artist advances, which are recorded in prepaid expenses until the event occurs, we pay the majority of event-related expenses at or after the event. Artists are paid when the event occurs under one of several different formulas, which may include fixed guarantees and/or a percentage of ticket sales or event profits, net of any advance they have received.  When an event is cancelled, any cash held in deferred revenue is reclassified to accrued expenses as those funds are typically refunded to the fan within 30 days of event cancellation. When a show is rescheduled, fans have the ability to request a refund if they do not want to attend the event on the new date, although historically we have had low levels of refund requests for rescheduled events.We view our available cash as cash and cash equivalents, less ticketing-related client cash, less event-related deferred revenue, less accrued expenses due to artists and cash collected on behalf of others, plus event-related prepaid expenses. This is essentially our cash available to, among other things, repay debt balances, make acquisitions, and finance capital expenditures.Our intra-year cash fluctuations are impacted by the seasonality of our various businesses. Examples of seasonal effects include our Concerts segment, which reports the majority of its revenue in the second and third quarters. Cash inflows and outflows depend on the timing of event-related payments but the majority of the inflows generally occur prior to the event. See “—Seasonality” below. We believe that we have sufficient financial flexibility to fund these fluctuations and to access the global capital markets on satisfactory terms and in adequate amounts, although there can be no assurance that this will be the case, and capital could be less accessible and/or more costly given current economic conditions. We expect cash flows from operations and borrowings under our amended senior secured credit facility, along with other financing alternatives, to satisfy working capital requirements, capital expenditures and debt service requirements for at least the succeeding year.We may need to incur additional debt or issue equity to make other strategic acquisitions or investments. There can be no assurance that such financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. We may make significant acquisitions in the near term, subject to limitations imposed by our financing agreements and market conditions.The lenders under our revolving loans and counterparties to our interest rate hedge agreements consists of banks and other third-party financial institutions. While we currently have no indications or expectations that such lenders will be unable to fund their commitments as required, we can provide no assurances that future funding availability will not be impacted by adverse conditions in the financial markets. Should an individual lender default on its obligations, the remaining lenders would not be required to fund the shortfall, resulting in a reduction in the total amount available to us for future borrowings, but would remain obligated to fund their own commitments. Should the counterparty to our interest rate hedge agreement default on its obligation, we could experience higher interest rate volatility during the period of any such default.
In January 2023, we issued $1.0 billion principal amount of 3.125% convertible senior notes due 2029. In conjunction with this issuance, we used approximately $485.8 million of the net proceeds to repurchase $440.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2.5% convertible senior notes due 2023, entered into capped call transactions at a cost of $75.5 million, paid debt issuance costs of $15.0 million and any remaining proceeds are available for general corporate purposes.
In February 2023, we amended our senior secured credit facility. The amendments provides for, among other things: (i) replacement of the benchmark reference rate of the Eurodollar Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) with the Term SOFR Rate for borrowings denominated in Dollars and for each Alternative Currency (as defined in the Credit Agreement), a corresponding reference rate, as set forth in the Amended Credit Agreement, (ii) deletion of the provisions regarding Canadian bankers’ acceptances, and (iii) the addition of the Company’s ability to draw letters of credit in Canadian Dollars.Our senior secured credit facility consists of (i) a $400 million term loan A facility, (ii) a $950 million term loan B facility, (iii) a $500 million revolving credit facility and (iv) a $130 million incremental revolving credit facility. In addition, subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase such facilities by an amount equal to the sum of (x) $855 million, (y) the aggregate principal amount of voluntary prepayments of the term loan A and term loan B and permanent reductions of the revolving credit facility commitments, in each case, other than from proceeds of long-term indebtedness, and (z) additional amounts so long as the senior secured leverage ratio calculated on a pro-forma basis (as defined in the agreement) is no greater than 3.75x. The combined revolving credit facilities provide for borrowings up to $630 million with sublimits of up to (i) $150 million for the issuance of letters of credit, (ii) $50 million for swingline loans, (iii) $300 million for borrowings in Dollars, Euros or British Pounds and (iv) $100 million for borrowings in those or one or more other approved currencies. The amended senior secured credit facility is secured by a first priority lien on substantially all of the tangible and intangible personal property of LNE and LNE’s domestic subsidiaries that are guarantors, and by a pledge of substantially all of the shares of stock, partnership interests and limited liability company interests of our direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries and 65% of each class of capital stock of any first-tier foreign subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions.The interest rates per annum applicable to revolving credit facility loans and term loan A under the amended senior secured credit facility are, at our option, equal to either Term Benchmark Loans or RFR Loans (as defined in the Credit Agreement) plus 2.25% or a base rate plus 1.25%. The interest rates per annum applicable to the term loan B are, at our option, equal to either Term Benchmark Loans or RFR Loans plus 1.75% or a base rate plus 0.75%. We have an interest rate swap agreement that ensures the interest rate on $500.0 million principal amount of our outstanding term loan B does not exceed 3.445% through October 2026. The agreement was amended in February 2023 along with the transition from LIBOR to SOFR. The interest rates per annum applicable to the incremental revolving credit facility are, at our option, equal to either Term Benchmark Loans or RFR Loans plus 2.5% or a base rate plus 1.5%. We are required to pay a commitment fee of 0.5% per year on the undrawn portion available under the revolving credit facility, 1.75% per year on the undrawn portion available under the incremental revolving credit facility and variable fees on outstanding letters of credit.For the term loan A, we are required to make quarterly payments increasing over time from $2.5 million to $5.0 million with the balance due at maturity in October 2024. For the term loan B, we are required to make quarterly payments of $2.4 million with the balance due at maturity in October 2026. Both the existing and incremental revolving credit facilities mature in October 2024. We are also required to make mandatory prepayments of the loans under the amended credit agreement, subject to specified exceptions, from excess cash flow and with the proceeds of asset sales, debt issuances and specified other events. As of March 31, 2023, the outstanding principal amount of our term loan A facility is $377.5 million and term loan B facility is $843.5 million.There were no borrowings under the revolving credit facilities as of March 31, 2023. Based on our outstanding letters of credit of $50.3 million, $579.7 million was available for future borrowings from revolving credit facilities.
As of March 31, 2023, we believe we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants related to our senior secured credit facility and our corporate senior secured notes, senior notes and convertible senior notes. We expect to remain in compliance with all of these covenants throughout 2023.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we completed various acquisitions that resulted in cash acquired, net of cash paid of $96.4 million. This includes acquisition of businesses for which we assumed debt of $271.2 million.
Venue and ticketing operations are capital intensive businesses, requiring continual investment in our existing venues and ticketing systems in order to address fan and artist expectations, technological industry advances and various federal, state and/or local regulations.We categorize capital outlays between maintenance capital expenditures and revenue generating capital expenditures. Maintenance capital expenditures are associated with the renewal and improvement of existing venues and technology systems, web development and administrative offices. Revenue generating capital expenditures generally relate to the construction of new venues, major renovations to existing buildings or buildings that are being added to our venue network, the development of new ticketing tools and technology enhancements. Revenue generating capital expenditures can also include smaller projects whose purpose is to increase revenue and/or improve operating income. Capital expenditures typically increase during periods when our venues are not in operation since that is the time that such improvements can be completed.Our capital expenditures, including accruals for amounts incurred but not yet paid for, but net of expenditures funded by outside parties such as landlords and noncontrolling interest partners or expenditures funded by insurance proceeds, consisted of the following:
Revenue generating capital expenditures during the first three months of 2023 increased from the same period of the prior year primarily due to enhancements at our theaters and amphitheaters in North America.We currently expect capital expenditures to be approximately $450 million for the full year of 2023 as we continue catching up on projects delayed due to supply chain constraints and further expand our global platform, with approximately two-thirds of this capital expenditure to be for revenue generating projects.
Cash provided by operating activities decreased $42.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period of the prior year primarily due to decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities from the timing of payments. This was partially offset by higher deferred revenue from more events on sale during the current year and an increase in first quarter of 2023 operating results compared to the first quarter of 2022 due to certain markets largely closed during the first quarter of 2022 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cash used in investing activities decreased $55.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the prior year primarily due to cash acquired from acquisitions, net of cash paid of $96.4 million during the current year whereas the prior year was cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash acquired of $14.0 million. This was partially offset by $54.4 million in higher purchases of property, plant and equipment in 2023 for revenue generating and maintenance capital expenditures. See “—Uses of Cash - Acquisitions and Capital Expenditures” above for further discussion.
Cash provided by financing activities was $225.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to cash used in financing activities of $75.0 million for the same period of the prior year primarily due to proceeds in 2023 from the issuance of the 3.125% convertible senior notes partially offset by the repurchase of the 2.5% convertible senior notes and capped call transactions in connection with the issuance of the 3.125% convertible senior notes. See “—Sources of Cash” above for further discussion.
Information regarding the seasonality of our business can be found in Part I—Financial Information—Item 1.—Financial Statements—Note 1 – Basis of Presentation and Other Information.
We are exposed to market risks arising from changes in market rates and prices, including movements in foreign currency exchange rates and interest rates.
We have operations in countries throughout the world. The financial results of our foreign operations are measured in their local currencies. Our foreign subsidiaries also carry certain net assets or liabilities that are denominated in a currency other than that subsidiary’s functional currency. As a result, our financial results could be affected by factors such as changes in foreign currency exchange rates or weak economic conditions in the foreign markets in which we have operations. Currently, we do not have significant operations in hyper-inflationary countries. Our foreign operations reported an operating income of $25.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023. We estimate that a 10% change in the value of the United States dollar relative to foreign currencies would change our operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023 by $2.6 million. As of March 31, 2023, our most significant foreign exchange exposure included the Euro, British Pound, Australian Dollar, Canadian Dollar and Mexican Peso. This analysis does not consider the implication such currency fluctuations could have on the overall economic conditions of the United States or other foreign countries in which we operate or on the results of operations of our foreign entities. In addition, the reported carrying value of our assets and liabilities, including the total cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign operations, will also be affected by changes in foreign currency exchange rates.We primarily use forward currency contracts, in addition to options, to reduce our exposure to foreign currency risk associated with short-term artist fee commitments. At March 31, 2023, we had forward currency contracts outstanding with an aggregate notional amount of $354.3 million.
Our market risk is also affected by changes in interest rates. We had $6.7 billion of total debt, excluding unamortized debt discounts and issuance costs, outstanding as of March 31, 2023. Of the total amount, we had $5.8 billion of fixed-rate debt and $0.9 billion of floating-rate debt.Based on the amount of our floating-rate debt as of March 31, 2023, each 25-basis point increase or decrease in interest rates would increase or decrease our annual interest expense and cash outlay by approximately $2.1 million. This potential increase or decrease is based on the simplified assumption that the level of floating-rate debt remains constant with an immediate across-the-board increase or decrease as of March 31, 2023 with no subsequent change in rates for the remainder of the period.In January 2020, we entered into an interest rate swap agreement that is designated as a cash flow hedge for accounting purposes to effectively convert a portion of our floating-rate debt to a fixed-rate basis. The agreement was amended in February 2023 along with the transition from LIBOR to SOFR. The swap agreement expires in October 2026, has a notional amount of $500.0 million and ensures that a portion of our floating-rate debt does not exceed 3.445%.
Information regarding recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements can be found in Part I — Financial Information—Item 1.—Financial Statements—Note 1 – Basis of Presentation and Other Information.
The preparation of our financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates that are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The result of these evaluations forms the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the reported amount of revenue and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such difference could be material.
Management believes that the accounting estimates involved in business combinations, impairment of long-lived assets and goodwill, revenue recognition, and income taxes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results, and they require management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, resulting from the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. These critical accounting estimates, the judgments and assumptions and the effect if actual results differ from these assumptions are described in Part II—Financial InformationItem 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023.
There have been no changes to our critical accounting policies during the three months ended March 31, 2023.