
The Company franchises and operates McDonald’s restaurants, which serve a locally relevant menu of quality food and beverages in communities across more than 100 countries. Of the 40,535 McDonald's restaurants at March 31, 2023, 95% were franchised.The Company’s reporting segments are aligned with its strategic priorities and reflect how management reviews and evaluates operating performance. Significant reportable segments include the United States ("U.S.") and International Operated Markets. In addition, there is the International Developmental Licensed Markets & Corporate segment, which includes the results of over 75 countries, as well as Corporate activities.McDonald’s franchised restaurants are owned and operated under one of the following structures - conventional franchise, developmental license or affiliate. The optimal ownership structure for an individual restaurant, trading area or market (country) is based on a variety of factors, including the availability of individuals with entrepreneurial experience and financial resources, as well as the local legal and regulatory environment in critical areas such as property ownership and franchising. The business relationship between the Company and its independent franchisees is supported by adhering to standards and policies, including McDonald's Global Brand Standards, and is of fundamental importance to overall performance and to protecting the McDonald’s brand.The Company is primarily a franchisor and believes franchising is paramount to delivering great-tasting food, locally relevant customer experiences and driving profitability. Franchising enables an individual to be their own employer and maintain control over all employment related matters, marketing and pricing decisions, while also benefiting from the strength of McDonald’s global brand, operating system and financial resources.Directly operating McDonald’s restaurants contributes significantly to the Company's ability to act as a credible franchisor. One of the strengths of the franchising model is that the expertise from operating Company-owned restaurants allows McDonald’s to improve the operations and success of all restaurants while innovations from franchisees can be tested and, when viable, efficiently implemented across relevant restaurants. Having Company-owned and operated restaurants provides Company personnel with a venue for restaurant operations training experience. In addition, in our Company-owned and operated restaurants, and in collaboration with franchisees, the Company is able to further develop and refine operating standards, marketing concepts and product and pricing strategies that will ultimately benefit McDonald’s restaurants.The Company’s revenues consist of sales by Company-operated restaurants and fees from restaurants operated by franchisees. Fees vary by type of site, amount of Company investment, if any, and local business conditions. These fees, along with occupancy and operating rights, are stipulated in franchise/license agreements that generally have 20-year terms. The Company’s Other revenues are comprised of fees paid by franchisees to recover a portion of costs incurred by the Company for various technology platforms, revenues from brand licensing arrangements to market and sell consumer packaged goods using the McDonald’s brand and, for periods prior to its sale on April 1, 2022, third-party revenues for the Company's Dynamic Yield business.
Under a conventional franchise arrangement, the Company generally owns or secures a long-term lease on the land and building for the restaurant location and the franchisee pays for equipment, signs, seating and décor. The Company believes that ownership of real estate, combined with the co-investment by franchisees, enables it to achieve restaurant performance levels that are among the highest in the industry.Franchisees are responsible for reinvesting capital in their businesses over time. In addition, to accelerate implementation of certain initiatives, the Company may co-invest with franchisees to fund improvements to their restaurants or operating systems. These investments, developed in collaboration with franchisees, are designed to cater to consumer preferences, improve local business performance and increase the value of the McDonald's brand through the development of modernized, more attractive and higher revenue generating restaurants.The Company requires franchisees to meet rigorous standards and generally does not work with passive investors. The business relationship with franchisees is designed to facilitate consistency and high quality at all McDonald’s restaurants. Conventional franchisees contribute to the Company’s revenue, primarily through the payment of rent and royalties based upon a percent of sales, with specified minimum rent payments, along with initial fees paid upon the opening of a new restaurant or grant of a new franchise. The Company's heavily franchised business model is designed to generate stable and predictable revenue, which is largely a function of franchisee sales, and resulting cash flow streams.
Under a developmental license or affiliate arrangement, licensees are responsible for operating and managing their businesses, providing capital (including the real estate interest) and developing and opening new restaurants. The Company generally does not invest any capital under a developmental license or affiliate arrangement, and it receives a royalty based on a percent of sales, and generally receives initial fees upon the opening of a new restaurant or grant of a new license. While developmental license and affiliate arrangements are largely the same, affiliate arrangements are used in a limited number of foreign markets (primarily China and Japan) within the International Developmental Licensed Markets segment as well as a limited number of individual restaurants within the International Operated Markets segment, where the Company also has an equity investment and records its share of net results in equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates.
The Company’s growth strategy, Accelerating the Arches (the “Strategy”), encompasses all aspects of McDonald’s business as the leading global omni-channel restaurant brand. The Strategy reflects the Company’s purpose, mission and values, as well as growth pillars that build on the Company’s competitive advantages.
The following purpose, mission and values underpin the Company’s success and are at the heart of the Strategy. Through its size and scale, the Company embraces and prioritizes its role and commitment to the communities in which it operates through its purpose to feed and foster communities, and its mission to create delicious feel-good moments for everyone. The Company is guided by five core values that define who it is and how it runs its business across the three-legged stool of franchisees, suppliers and employees:1.Serve - We put our customers and people first; 2.Inclusion - We open our doors to everyone;3.Integrity - We do the right thing;  4.Community - We are good neighbors; and 5.Family - We get better together.The Company believes that its people, all around the world, set it apart and bring these values to life on a daily basis.
The following growth pillars, M-C-D, build on the Company’s historic strengths and articulate areas of further opportunity. Under the Strategy, the Company will:•Maximize our Marketing by investing in new, culturally relevant approaches, grounded in fan truths, to effectively communicate the story of the Company’s brand, food and purpose. This is exemplified by campaigns that elevate the entire brand and continue to be repeated and scaled around the globe, such as the Famous Orders platform and the Raise Your Arches campaign. The Company is committed to a marketing strategy that highlights value at every tier of the menu, as affordability remains a cornerstone of the McDonald’s brand and is especially important to customers in uncertain economic environments.•Commit to the Core menu by tapping into customer demand for the familiar and focusing on serving the Company’s iconic products, such as its World Famous Fries, the Big Mac, Chicken McNuggets and the McFlurry. Globally, the Company possesses over 10 of these "billion-dollar brand equities." The Company continues to improve on its classics, including by implementing a series of operational and formulation changes designed to deliver hotter, juicer, tastier burgers across the globe. While leaning into core icons like Chicken McNuggets, the Company will continue to focus on scaling emerging equities such as the McSpicy and McCrispy Chicken Sandwiches. This is exemplified by the U.S. leveraging learnings from the U.K., Canada and Germany to relaunch its Crispy Chicken Sandwich under the McCrispy global equity umbrella. The Company also continues to see a significant opportunity with coffee, demonstrated by markets leveraging the McCafé brand, customer experience, value and quality to drive long-term growth.•Double Down on the 4D's: Digital, Delivery, Drive Thru and, the recently added, Restaurant Development by leveraging the Company’s competitive strengths and building a powerful digital experience growth engine to deliver a personalized and convenient customer experience. To unlock further growth, the Company expects to continue to accelerate the pace of restaurant openings and technology innovation so that whenever and however customers choose to interact with McDonald’s, they can enjoy a fast, easy experience that meets their needs. In the first quarter of 2023, digital channels (the mobile app, delivery and kiosk) comprised almost 40% of Systemwide sales in the Company’s top six markets. This represented over $7.5 billion in digital Systemwide sales and growth of over $2.0 billion, or 30%, compared to the prior year.◦Digital: The Company’s digital experience growth engine — “MyMcDonald’s” — is transforming its offerings across drive thru, takeaway, delivery, curbside pick-up and dine-in. Through the digital tools, customers can access personalized offers, participate in a loyalty program, order through the mobile app and receive McDonald's food through the channel of their choice. A recent digital enhancement piloting in the U.S. enables crew to begin assembling a customer’s mobile order prior to their arrival at the restaurant to expedite service and elevate customer satisfaction. Additionally, the Company has successful loyalty programs in 50 markets around the world, including all of its top six markets. The Company’s loyalty customers have proven to be highly engaged, with nearly 50 million active loyalty members across the Company’s top six markets during the first quarter of 2023, including over 28 million in the U.S.◦Delivery: Delivery is now offered in over 35,000 restaurants across about 100 markets, representing over 85% of McDonald’s restaurants. The Company is continuing to build on and enhance the delivery experience for customers, including by adding the ability to place a delivery order on the McDonald's mobile app (a feature that is now available in some of the Company’s largest markets, including the U.S., the U.K., Canada and Australia). The Company has also put in place long-term strategic partnerships with delivery providers such as UberEats, DoorDash, Just Eat Takeaway.com and Deliveroo. These partnerships are expected to benefit the Company, customers and franchisees by optimizing operational efficiencies and creating a seamless customer experience.◦Drive Thru: The Company has drive thru locations in over 26,000 restaurants globally, including nearly 95% of the approximately 13,500 locations in the U.S. This channel remains a competitive advantage, and the Company expects that it will become even more critical to meeting customers’ demand for flexibility and choice. The Company continues to build on its drive thru advantage, as the vast majority of new restaurant openings in the U.S. and International Operated Markets will include a drive thru.◦Restaurant Development: The Company expects to continue to accelerate the pace of restaurant openings, with plans to open approximately 1,900 new restaurants across the globe in 2023, which will contribute to nearly 4% unit growth (net of closures). The Company believes there is opportunity for further growth in many of its largest markets and to explore new formats under the McDonald’s brand over the coming years.
Foundational to the Strategy is keeping the customer and restaurant crew at the center of everything the Company does, along with a relentless focus on running great restaurants, empowering its people and modernizing ways of working through Accelerating the Organization.These efforts, coupled with investments in innovation, are designed to enhance the customer experience and deliver long-term profitable growth for all stakeholders. The Strategy is aligned with the Company’s capital allocation philosophy of investing in opportunities to grow the business (through new restaurants and reinvesting in existing restaurants) and returning free cash flow to shareholders over time through dividends and share repurchases.The Company believes the Strategy builds on its inherent strengths by harnessing its competitive advantages while leveraging its size, scale and agility to adapt and adjust to uncertain economic and operating environments to meet customer demands. The Strategy is supported by a strong global senior leadership team aimed at executing against the MCD growth pillars and accelerating the Company’s broad-based business momentum.
Global comparable sales increased 12.6% for the quarter, reflecting strong comparable sales of 12.6% across each segment.•U.S. comparable sales results benefited from strategic menu price increases and positive comparable guest count growth.  Successful operational execution in McDonald’s restaurants, effective marketing campaigns featuring the core menu and continued digital and delivery growth contributed to strong comparable sales results.•International Operated Markets segment results reflected strong comparable sales across the Big Five* and the majority of other markets.•International Developmental Licensed Markets segment results reflected strong comparable sales led by Japan, along with all geographic regions.In addition to the comparable sales results, the Company had the following financial results for the quarter:•Consolidated revenues increased 4% (8% in constant currencies).•Systemwide sales increased 9% (13% in constant currencies).•Consolidated operating income increased 10% (14% in constant currencies). •Diluted earnings per share was $2.45, an increase of 66% (72% in constant currencies). Excluding $0.18 per share of current year restructuring charges related to Accelerating the Organization, diluted earnings per share was $2.63, an increase of 15% (19% in constant currencies) when also excluding prior year charges detailed in the Net Income and Diluted Earnings Per Share section on page 19 of this report.Management reviews and analyzes business results excluding the effect of foreign currency translation, impairment and other strategic charges and gains, as well as material regulatory and other income tax impacts, and bases incentive compensation plans on these results because the Company believes this better represents underlying business trends.    *Australia, Canada, France, Germany and the U.K. are collectively referred to as the "Big Five" international markets.
•Constant currency results exclude the effects of foreign currency translation and are calculated by translating current year results at prior year average exchange rates. Management reviews and analyzes business results excluding the effect of foreign currency translation, impairment and other charges and gains, as well as material regulatory and other income tax impacts, and bases incentive compensation plans on these results because the Company believes this better represents underlying business trends.•Comparable sales and comparable guest counts are compared to the same period in the prior year and represent sales and transactions, respectively, at all restaurants, whether operated by the Company or by franchisees, in operation at least thirteen months including those temporarily closed. Some of the reasons restaurants may be temporarily closed include reimaging or remodeling, rebuilding, road construction, natural disasters and acts of war, terrorism or other hostilities (including restaurants temporarily closed due to COVID-19, as well as those that remain closed in Ukraine). Restaurants in Russia were treated as permanently closed as of April 1, 2022 and therefore excluded from the calculation of comparable sales and comparable guest counts beginning in the second quarter of 2022. Comparable sales exclude the impact of currency translation and the sales of any market considered hyperinflationary (generally identified as those markets whose cumulative inflation rate over a three-year period exceeds 100%), which management believes more accurately reflects the underlying business trends. Beginning in the first quarter of 2023, McDonald's excluded results from Argentina and Lebanon in the calculation of comparable sales due to hyperinflation (Venezuela continues to be excluded). Comparable sales are driven by changes in guest counts and average check, the latter of which is affected by changes in pricing and product mix. •Systemwide sales include sales at all restaurants, whether operated by the Company or by franchisees. This includes sales from digital channels, which are comprised of the mobile app, delivery and kiosk at both Company-operated and franchised restaurants. While franchised sales are not recorded as revenues by the Company, management believes the information is important in understanding the Company's financial performance because these sales are the basis on which the Company calculates and records franchised revenues and are indicative of the financial health of the franchisee base. The Company's revenues consist of sales by Company-operated restaurants and fees from franchised restaurants operated by conventional franchisees, developmental licensees and affiliates. Changes in Systemwide sales are primarily driven by comparable sales and net restaurant unit expansion. •Free cash flow, defined as cash provided by operations less capital expenditures, and free cash flow conversion rate, defined as free cash flow divided by net income, are measures reviewed by management in order to evaluate the Company’s ability to convert net profits into cash resources, after reinvesting in the core business, that can be used to pursue opportunities to enhance shareholder value.
n/m Not meaningful
The impact of foreign currency translation on consolidated operating results for the quarter continued to reflect the weakening of all major currencies against the U.S. Dollar, including the Euro, British Pound and Australian Dollar.While changes in foreign currency exchange rates affect reported results, McDonald's mitigates exposures, where practical, by purchasing goods and services in local currencies, financing in local currencies and hedging certain foreign-denominated cash flows. Results excluding the effect of foreign currency translation (referred to as constant currency) are calculated by translating current year results at prior year average exchange rates.
Net income increased 63% (69% in constant currencies) to $1,802.3 million, and diluted earnings per share increased 66% (72% constant currencies) to $2.45. Foreign currency translation had a negative impact of $0.09 on diluted earnings per share.Results for 2023 included the following:•Pre-tax restructuring charges of $180 million, or $0.18 per share, related to Accelerating the OrganizationResults for 2022 included the following:•Pre-tax expenses of $127 million, or $0.13 per share, primarily related to Russia •$500 million, or $0.67 per share, of nonoperating expense related to the settlement of a tax audit in FranceExcluding the above items, results reflected strong operating performance driven primarily by higher sales-driven Franchised margins.During the quarter, the Company repurchased 2.2 million shares of stock for $584.5 million. Additionally, the Company paid a quarterly dividend of $1.52 per share, or $1.1 billion.
Dollars in millions, except per share data
The Company's revenues consist of sales by Company-operated restaurants and fees from restaurants operated by franchisees, developmental licensees and affiliates. Revenues from conventional franchised restaurants include rent and royalties based on a percent of sales with minimum rent payments, and initial fees. Revenues from restaurants licensed to developmental licensees and affiliates include a royalty based on a percent of sales, and generally include initial fees. The Company’s Other revenues are comprised of fees paid by franchisees to recover a portion of costs incurred by the Company for various technology platforms, revenues from brand licensing arrangements to market and sell consumer packaged goods using the McDonald’s brand and, for periods prior to its sale on April 1, 2022, third-party revenues for the Company's Dynamic Yield business.Franchised restaurants represented 95% of McDonald's restaurants worldwide at March 31, 2023. The Company's heavily franchised business model is designed to generate stable and predictable revenue, which is largely a function of franchisee sales, and resulting cash flow streams.
•Total Company-operated sales and franchised revenues increased 4% (8% in constant currencies), benefiting from strong sales performance across all segments. Revenue growth in the International Operated Markets segment in constant currencies was partly offset by the impact of the Company's exit from Russia in the second quarter of 2022.
The following table presents the percent change in comparable sales for the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
The following table presents the percent change in Systemwide sales for the quarter ended March 31, 2023:
*Unlike comparable sales, the Company has not excluded sales from hyperinflationary markets from Systemwide sales as these sales are the basis on which the Company calculates and records revenues. Franchised sales are not recorded as revenues by the Company, but are the basis on which the Company calculates and records franchised revenues and are indicative of the financial health of the franchisee base. The following table presents Franchised sales and the related increases/(decreases) for the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Franchised restaurant margins are measured as revenues from franchised restaurants less franchised restaurant occupancy costs. Franchised revenues include rent and royalties based on a percent of sales, and initial fees. Franchised restaurant occupancy costs include lease expense and depreciation, as the Company generally owns or secures a long-term lease on the land and building for the restaurant location.Company-operated restaurant margins are measured as sales from Company-operated restaurants less costs for food & paper, payroll & employee benefits and occupancy & other operating expenses necessary to run an individual restaurant. Company-operated margins exclude costs that are not allocated to individual restaurants, primarily payroll & employee benefit costs of non-restaurant support staff, which are included in Selling, general and administrative expenses.
n/m Not meaningful•Total restaurant margins increased $268.5 million, or 9% (12% in constant currencies). Franchised margins represented over 90% of restaurant margin dollars.•Results in all segments reflected strong sales-driven Franchised margins.•Company-operated margins in the U.S. and International Operated Markets segment reflected strong positive sales performance, with results for the International Operated Markets segment more than offset by the impact of the Company's exit from Russia in the second quarter of 2022 and by ongoing inflationary cost pressures.•Total restaurant margins included depreciation and amortization expense of $391.3 million.
•Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased $24.4 million, or 4% (2% in constant currencies). Results primarily reflect the comparison to prior year costs related to the 2022 Worldwide Owner/Operator convention.•Selling, general and administrative expenses as a percent of Systemwide sales were 2.2% and 2.4% for the quarters ended 2023 and 2022, respectively.
•Asset dispositions and other (income) expense, net primarily reflected the comparison to a prior year gain as a result of an increase to fair value of an existing restaurant joint venture in connection with the buyout of a joint venture partner within the International Operated Markets segment.•Impairment and other charges (gains), net reflected $180 million of pre-tax restructuring charges related to Accelerating the Organization.Results for the prior year reflected net pre-tax expenses of $127 million, primarily related to Russia.
•Operating Income: Operating income increased $219.8 million, or 10% (14% in constant currencies). Results reflected $180 million of pre-tax restructuring charges related to Accelerating the Organization. Results for the prior year reflected $127 million of costs, primarily related to Russia.
*Refer to the Impairment and other charges (gains), net line within the Other Operating (Income) Expense, Net section on page 23 of this report for details of the charges in this table. •Excluding the current and prior year charges shown in the table above, operating income increased 11% (15% in constant currencies).•U.S.: Operating income primarily reflected sales-driven growth in Franchised margins.•International Operated Markets: Results reflected strong operating performance across the majority of the segment. •International Developmental Licensed Markets & Corporate: Results reflected strong operating performance across the segment, led by Brazil and China.•Operating Margin: Operating margin is defined as operating income as a percent of total revenues. The contributions to operating margin differ by segment due to each segment's ownership structure, primarily due to the relative percentage of franchised versus Company-operated restaurants. Additionally, temporary restaurant closures, which vary by segment, impact the contribution of each segment to the consolidated operating margin. The increase in non-GAAP operating margin was due primarily to sales-driven growth in Franchised margins.
•Interest expense increased 15% (16% in constant currencies), primarily due to higher average interest rates as well as higher average debt balances when compared to the prior year.
•Interest income increased, primarily due to higher average interest rates when compared to the prior year.•Foreign currency and hedging activity includes net gains or losses on certain hedges that reduce the exposure to variability on certain intercompany foreign currency cash flow streams.•Other (income) expense, net for the prior year included $500 million of nonoperating expense related to the settlement of a tax audit in France.
•The effective income tax rate was 20.5% and 28.3% for the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.•Excluding the tax impacts of current and prior year charges (as described within the Operating Income & Operating Margin Reconciliation on page 24 of this report) and the prior year nonoperating expense related to an international tax audit, the effective income tax rate for the quarters ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was 20.9% and 21.3%, respectively.
The Company has a long history of generating significant cash from operations and has substantial credit capacity to fund operating and discretionary spending such as capital expenditures, debt repayments, dividends and share repurchases. Cash provided by operations totaled $2.4 billion and exceeded capital expenditures by $1.9 billion. Cash provided by operations increased $287 million, primarily due to improved operating results.Cash used for investing activities totaled $741 million, an increase of $187 million. The increase was primarily due to higher capital expenditures.Cash used for financing activities totaled $558 million, a decrease of $3.3 billion. The decrease was primarily due to lower treasury stock purchases and $1.1 billion of debt issuances in the first quarter 2023 compared to $1.4 billion in debt repayments in the first quarter 2022.
Based on current conditions, the following is provided to assist in forecasting the Company's future results for 2023.•The Company expects net restaurant unit expansion will contribute nearly 1.5% to 2023 Systemwide sales growth, in constant currencies.•The Company expects full year 2023 selling, general and administrative expenses of about 2.2% to 2.3% of Systemwide sales.•The Company expects 2023 operating margin percent to be about 45%.•Based on current interest and foreign currency exchange rates, the Company expects interest expense for the full year 2023 to increase between 10% and 12%, driven primarily by higher average interest rates.•The Company expects the effective income tax rate for the full year 2023 to be in the 20% to 22% range. Some volatility may result in a quarterly tax rate outside of the annual range. •The Company expects 2023 capital expenditures to be between $2.2 and $2.4 billion, about half of which will be directed towards new restaurant unit expansion across the U.S. and International Operated Markets. Globally, the Company expects to open about 1,900 restaurants. The Company will open more than 400 restaurants in the U.S. and International Operated Markets segments, and developmental licensees and affiliates will contribute capital towards about 1,500 restaurant openings in their respective markets. The Company expects about 1,500 net restaurant additions in 2023.•The Company expects to achieve a free cash flow conversion rate greater than 90%.
The information in this report contains forward-looking statements about future events and circumstances and their effects upon revenues, expenses and business opportunities. Generally speaking, any statement in this report not based upon historical fact is a forward-looking statement. Forward-looking statements can also be identified by the use of forward-looking or conditional words, such as “could,” “should,” “can,” “continue,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “intend,” “look,” “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “remain,” “confident” and “commit” or similar expressions. In particular, statements regarding our plans, strategies, prospects and expectations regarding our business and industry are forward-looking statements. They reflect our expectations, are not guarantees of performance and speak only as of the dates the statements are made. Except as required by law, we do not undertake to update such forward-looking statements. You should not rely unduly on forward-looking statements.
Our business results are subject to a variety of risks, including those that are described below and elsewhere in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The risks described below are not the only risks we face. Additional risks not currently known to us or that we currently deem to be immaterial may also significantly adversely affect our business. If any of these risks were to materialize or intensify, our expectations (or the underlying assumptions) may change and our performance may be adversely affected.
To drive Systemwide sales, operating income and free cash flow growth, our business strategies – including the components of our Accelerating the Arches growth strategy – must be effective in maintaining and strengthening customer appeal and capturing additional market share. Whether these strategies are successful depends mainly on our System’s continued ability to:•capitalize on our global scale, iconic brand and local market presence to build upon our historic strengths and competitive advantages, including by maximizing our marketing, committing to our core menu items, and doubling down on digital, delivery, drive thru and restaurant development;•innovate and differentiate the McDonald’s experience, including by preparing and serving our food in a way that balances value and convenience to our customers with profitability;•build upon our investments to transform and enhance the customer experience;•run great restaurants by driving efficiencies and expanding capacities while prioritizing health and safety;•accelerate our existing strategies, including through growth opportunities; and•evolve and adjust our strategies in response to, among other things, changing consumer behavior, and other events impacting our results of operations and liquidity.If we are delayed or unsuccessful in evolving or executing against our strategies, if the execution of our strategies proves to be more difficult, costly or time consuming than expected, or if our strategies do not yield the desired results, our business, financial condition and results of operations may suffer.
To continue to be successful in the future, we believe we must preserve, enhance and leverage the value and relevance of our brand, including our corporate purpose, mission and values. Brand value is based in part on consumer perceptions, which are affected by a variety of factors, including the nutritional content and preparation of our food, the ingredients we use, the manner in which we source commodities and general business practices across the System, including the people practices at McDonald’s restaurants. Consumer acceptance of our offerings is subject to change for a variety of reasons, and some changes can occur rapidly. For example, nutritional, health, environmental and other scientific studies and conclusions, which continuously evolve and may have contradictory implications, drive popular opinion, litigation and regulation (including initiatives intended to drive consumer behavior) in ways that affect the “informal eating out” (“IEO”) segment or perceptions of our brand, generally or relative to available alternatives. Our business could also be impacted by business incidents or practices, whether actual or perceived, particularly if they receive considerable publicity or result in litigation, as well as by our position or perceived lack of position on environmental, social responsibility, public policy, geopolitical and similar matters. Consumer perceptions may also be affected by adverse commentary from third parties, including through social media or conventional media outlets, regarding the quick-service category of the IEO segment or our brand, culture, operations, suppliers or franchisees. If we are unsuccessful in addressing adverse commentary or perceptions, whether or not accurate, our brand and financial results may suffer.
Our continued success depends on our System’s ability to build upon our historic strengths and competitive advantages. In order to do so, we need to anticipate and respond effectively to continuously shifting consumer demographics and industry trends in food sourcing, food preparation, food offerings, and consumer behavior and preferences, including with respect to the use of digital channels and environmental and social responsibility matters. If we are not able to predict, or quickly and effectively respond to, these changes, or if our competitors are able to do so more effectively, our financial results could be adversely impacted.Our ability to build upon our strengths and advantages also depends on the impact of pricing, promotional and marketing plans across the System, and the ability to adjust these plans to respond quickly and effectively to evolving customer behavior and preferences, as well as shifting economic and competitive conditions. Existing or future pricing strategies and marketing plans, as well as the value proposition they represent, are expected to continue to be important components of our business strategy. However, they may not be successful, or may not be as successful as the efforts of our competitors, which could negatively impact sales, guest counts and market share.Additionally, we operate in a complex and costly advertising environment. Our marketing and advertising programs may not be successful in reaching consumers in the way we intend. Our success depends in part on whether the allocation of our advertising and marketing resources across different channels, including digital, allows us to reach consumers effectively, efficiently and in ways that are meaningful to them. If our advertising and marketing programs are not successful, or are not as successful as those of our competitors, our sales, guest counts and market share could  decrease.
Our long-term business objectives depend on the successful Systemwide execution of our strategies. We continue to build upon our investments in restaurant development, technology, digital engagement and delivery in order to transform and enhance the customer experience. As part of these investments, we are continuing to place emphasis on improving our service model and strengthening relationships with customers, in part through digital channels and loyalty initiatives, mobile ordering and payment systems, and enhancing our drive thru technologies, which efforts may not generate expected results. We also continue to expand and refine our delivery initiatives, including through integrating delivery and mobile ordering. Utilizing a third-party delivery service may not have the same level of profitability as a non-delivery transaction, and may introduce additional food quality, food safety and customer satisfaction risks. If these customer experience initiatives are not successfully executed, or if we do not fully realize the intended benefits of these significant investments, our business results may suffer.
We compete primarily in the IEO segment, which is highly competitive. We also face sustained, intense competition from traditional, fast casual and other competitors, which may include many non-traditional market participants such as convenience stores, grocery stores, coffee shops and online retailers. We expect our environment to continue to be highly competitive, and our results in any particular reporting period may be impacted by a contracting IEO segment or by new or continuing actions, product offerings or consolidation of our competitors and third-party partners, which may have a short- or long-term impact on our results.We compete primarily on the basis of product choice, quality, affordability, service and location. In particular, we believe our ability to compete successfully in the current market environment depends on our ability to improve existing products, successfully develop and introduce new products, price our products appropriately, deliver a relevant customer experience, manage the complexity of our restaurant operations, manage our investments in restaurant development, technology, digital engagement and delivery, and respond effectively to our competitors’ actions or offerings or to unforeseen disruptive actions. There can be no assurance these strategies will be effective, and some strategies may be effective at improving some metrics while adversely affecting others, which could have the overall effect of harming our business.
Our success depends on our continued ability to use our existing trademarks and service marks in order to increase brand awareness and further develop our branded products in both domestic and international markets. We rely on a combination of trademarks, copyrights, service marks, trade secrets, patents and other intellectual property rights to protect our brand and branded products.We have registered certain trademarks and have other trademark registrations pending in the U.S. and certain foreign jurisdictions. The trademarks that we currently use have not been, and may never be, registered in all of the countries outside of the U.S. in which we do business or may do business in the future. It may be costly and time consuming to protect our intellectual property, and the steps we have taken to do so in the U.S. and foreign countries may not be adequate. In addition, the steps we have taken may not adequately ensure that we do not infringe the intellectual property of others, and third parties may claim infringement by us in the future. In particular, we may be involved in intellectual property claims, including often aggressive or opportunistic attempts to enforce patents used in information technology systems, which might affect our operations and results. Any claim of infringement, whether or not it has merit, could be time consuming, result in costly litigation and harm our business.In addition, we cannot ensure that franchisees and other third parties who hold licenses to our intellectual property will not take actions that adversely affect the value of our intellectual property.
We encounter differing cultural, regulatory, geopolitical and economic environments within and among the more than 100 countries where McDonald’s restaurants operate, and our ability to achieve our business objectives depends on the System’s success in these environments. Meeting customer expectations is complicated by the risks inherent in our global operating environment, and our global success is partially dependent on our System’s ability to leverage operating successes across markets and brand perceptions. Planned initiatives may not have appeal across multiple markets with McDonald’s customers and could drive unanticipated changes in customer perceptions and market share.Disruptions in operations or price volatility in a market can also result from governmental actions, such as price, foreign exchange or trade-related tariffs or controls, trade policies and regulations, sanctions and counter sanctions, government-mandated closure of our, our franchisees’ or our suppliers’ operations, and asset seizures. Such disruptions or volatility can also result from acts of war, terrorism or other hostilities. For example, the war between Russia and Ukraine has resulted in volatile and unpredictable conditions throughout the region, exacerbated volatile macroeconomic conditions and increased pressure on our supply chain and the availability and costs of commodities, including energy, which we expect to continue to impact our financial results. The broader impacts of the war and related sanctions, including on macroeconomic conditions, geopolitical tensions, consumer demand and the ability of us and our franchisees to operate in certain geographic areas, may also continue to have an adverse impact on our business and financial results. While we may face challenges and uncertainties in any of the markets in which we operate, such challenges and uncertainties are often heightened in developing markets, which may entail a relatively higher risk of political instability, economic volatility, crime, corruption and social and ethnic unrest. In many cases, such challenges may be exacerbated by the lack of an independent and experienced judiciary and uncertainty in how local law is applied and enforced, including in areas most relevant to commercial transactions and foreign investment. An inability to manage effectively the risks associated with our international operations could adversely affect our business and financial results.
We depend on the effectiveness of our supply chain management to assure a reliable and sufficient supply of quality products, equipment and other materials on favorable terms. Although many of these items are sourced from a wide variety of suppliers in countries around the world, certain items have limited suppliers, which may increase our reliance on those suppliers. Supply chain interruptions and related price increases have in the past and may in the future adversely affect us as well as our suppliers and franchisees, whose performance may have a significant impact on our results. Such interruptions and price increases could be caused by shortages, inflationary pressures, unexpected increases in demand, transportation-related issues, labor-related issues, technology-related issues, weather-related events, natural disasters, acts of war, terrorism or other hostilities, or other factors beyond the control of us or our suppliers or franchisees. Interruptions in our System’s supply chain or ineffective contingency planning can increase our costs and/or limit the availability of products, equipment and other materials that are critical to our System’s operations or to restaurant development.
Our success as a heavily franchised business relies to a large degree on the financial success and cooperation of our franchisees, including our developmental licensees and affiliates. Our restaurant margins arise from two sources: fees from franchised restaurants (e.g., rent and royalties based on a percentage of sales) and, to a lesser degree, sales from Company-operated restaurants. Our franchisees and developmental licensees manage their businesses independently and therefore are responsible for the day-to-day operation of their restaurants. The revenues we realize from franchised restaurants are largely dependent on the ability of our franchisees to grow their sales. Business risks affecting our operations also affect our franchisees.  If franchisee sales trends worsen, or any of such risks materialize or intensify, our financial results could be negatively affected, which may be material.Our success also relies on the willingness and ability of our independent franchisees and affiliates to implement major initiatives, which may include financial investment, and to remain aligned with us on operating, value/promotional and capital-intensive reinvestment plans. The ability of franchisees to contribute to the achievement of our plans is dependent in large part on the availability to them of funding at reasonable interest rates and may be negatively impacted by the financial markets in general, by their or our creditworthiness or by banks’ lending practices. If our franchisees are unwilling or unable to invest in major initiatives or are unable to obtain financing at commercially reasonable rates, or at all, our future growth and results of operations could be adversely affected.Our operating performance could also be negatively affected if our franchisees experience food safety or other operational problems or project an image inconsistent with our brand and values, particularly if our contractual and other rights and remedies are limited, costly to exercise or subjected to litigation and potential delays. If franchisees do not successfully operate restaurants in a manner consistent with our required standards, our brand’s image and reputation could be harmed, which in turn could hurt our business and operating results.Our ownership mix also affects our results and financial condition. The decision to own restaurants or to operate under franchise or license agreements is driven by many factors whose interrelationship is complex. The benefits of our more heavily franchised structure depend on various factors, including whether we have effectively selected franchisees, licensees and/or affiliates that meet our rigorous standards, whether we are able to successfully integrate them into our structure and whether their performance and the resulting ownership mix supports our brand and financial objectives.
Our success depends in part on our System’s ability to effectively attract, recruit, develop, motivate and retain qualified individuals to work in McDonald’s restaurants and to maintain appropriately-staffed restaurants in an intensely competitive labor market. We and our franchisees have experienced and may continue to experience challenges in adequately staffing certain McDonald’s restaurants, which can negatively impact operations, including speed of service to customers, and customer satisfaction levels. The System’s ability to meet its labor needs is generally subject to external factors, including the availability of sufficient workforce, unemployment levels and prevailing wages in the markets in which we operate.Further, our System has experienced increased costs and competition associated with attracting, recruiting, developing, motivating and retaining qualified employees, as well as with promoting awareness of the opportunities of working at McDonald’s restaurants.  We and our franchisees also continue to be impacted by increasingly complex U.S. and international laws and regulations affecting our respective workforces.  These laws and regulations are increasingly focused on, and in certain cases impose requirements with respect to, employment matters such as wages and hours, healthcare, immigration, retirement and other employee benefits and workplace practices. Such laws and regulations can expose us and our franchisees to increased costs and other effects of compliance, including potential liability, and all such labor and compliance costs could have a negative impact on our Company-operated margins and franchisee profitability.Our potential exposure to reputational and other harm regarding our workplace practices or conditions or those of our independent franchisees or suppliers, including those giving rise to claims of harassment or discrimination (or perceptions thereof) or workplace safety, could have a negative impact on consumer perceptions of us and our business. Additionally, economic action, such as boycotts, protests, work stoppages or campaigns by labor organizations, could adversely affect us (including our ability to attract, recruit, develop, motivate and retain talent) or our franchisees and suppliers, whose performance may have a significant impact on our results.
Effective succession planning for management is important to our long-term success. Failure to effectively attract, recruit, develop, motivate and retain qualified key personnel, or to execute smooth personnel transitions, could disrupt our business and adversely affect our results.
Our ability to increase sales and profits depends on our System’s ability to meet expectations for safe food and on our ability to manage the potential impact on McDonald’s of food-borne illnesses and food or product safety issues that may arise in the future, including in the supply chain, restaurants or delivery. Food safety is a top priority, and we dedicate substantial resources aimed at ensuring that our customers enjoy safe food products, including as our menu and service model evolve. However, food safety events, including instances of food-borne illness, occur within the food industry and our System from time to time and could occur in the future. Instances of food tampering, food contamination or food-borne illness, whether actual or perceived, could adversely affect our brand, reputation and financial results.
We have significant real estate operations, primarily in connection with our restaurant business. We generally own or secure a long-term lease on the land and building for conventional franchised and Company-operated restaurant sites. We seek to identify and develop restaurant locations that offer convenience to customers and long-term sales and profit potential. As we generally secure long-term real estate interests for our restaurants, we have limited flexibility to quickly alter our real estate portfolio. The competitive business landscape continues to evolve in light of changing business trends, consumer preferences, trade area demographics, consumer use of digital, delivery and drive thru, local competitive positions and other economic factors. If our restaurants are not located in desirable locations, or if we do not evolve in response to these factors, it could adversely affect Systemwide sales and profitability.Our real estate values and the costs associated with our real estate operations are also impacted by a variety of other factors, including governmental regulations, insurance, zoning, tax and eminent domain laws, interest rate levels, the cost of financing, natural disasters, acts of war, terrorism or other hostilities, or other factors beyond our control. A significant change in real estate values, or an increase in costs as a result of any of these factors, could adversely affect our operating results.
We are increasingly reliant upon technology systems, such as point-of-sale, that support our business operations, including our digital and delivery solutions, and technologies that facilitate communication and collaboration with affiliated entities, customers, employees, franchisees, suppliers, service providers or other independent third parties to conduct our business, whether developed and maintained by us or provided by third parties. Any failure or interruption of these systems could significantly impact our or our franchisees’ operations, or our customers’ experiences and perceptions.Security incidents or breaches have from time to time occurred and may in the future occur involving our systems, the systems of the parties with whom we communicate or collaborate (including franchisees) or the systems of third-party providers. These may include such things as unauthorized access, phishing attacks, account takeovers, denial of service, computer viruses, introduction of malware or ransomware and other disruptive problems caused by hackers. Certain of these technology systems contain personal, financial and other information of our customers, employees, franchisees and their employees, suppliers and other third parties, as well as financial, proprietary and other confidential information related to our business. Despite response procedures and measures in place in the event of an incident, a security breach could result in disruptions, shutdowns, or the theft or unauthorized disclosure of such information. The actual or alleged occurrence of any of these incidents could result in mitigation costs, reputational damage, adverse publicity, loss of consumer confidence, reduced sales and profits, complications in executing our growth initiatives and regulatory and legal risk, including criminal penalties or civil liabilities.Despite the implementation of business continuity measures, any of these technology systems could become vulnerable to damage, disability or failures due to fire, power loss, telecommunications failure or other catastrophic events. Certain technology systems may also become vulnerable, unreliable or inefficient in cases where technology vendors limit or terminate product support and maintenance. Our increasing reliance on third-party systems also subjects us to risks faced by those third-party businesses, including operational, security and credit risks. If technology systems were to fail or otherwise be unavailable, or if business continuity or disaster recovery plans were not effective, and we were unable to recover in a timely manner, we could experience an interruption in our or our franchisees’ operations.
Our regulatory and legal environment worldwide exposes us to complex compliance, litigation and similar risks that could affect our operations and results in material ways. Many of our markets are subject to increasing, conflicting and highly prescriptive regulations involving, among other matters, restaurant operations, product packaging, marketing, the nutritional and allergen content and safety of our food and other products, labeling and other disclosure practices. Compliance efforts with those regulations may be affected by ordinary variations in food preparation among our own restaurants and the need to rely on the accuracy and completeness of information from third-party suppliers. We also are subject to increasing public focus, including by governmental and non-governmental organizations, on environmental, social responsibility and corporate governance (“ESG”) matters. Our success depends in part on our ability to manage the impact of regulations and other initiatives that can affect our business plans and operations, which have increased and may continue to increase our costs of doing business and exposure to litigation, governmental investigations or other proceedings.We are also subject to legal proceedings that may adversely affect our business, including, but not limited to, class actions, administrative proceedings, government investigations and proceedings, shareholder proceedings, employment and personal injury claims, landlord/tenant disputes, supplier-related disputes, and claims by current or former franchisees. Regardless of whether claims against us are valid or whether we are found to be liable, claims may be expensive to defend and may divert management’s attention away from operations.Litigation and regulatory action concerning our relationship with franchisees and the legal distinction between our franchisees and us for employment law or other purposes, if determined adversely, could increase costs, negatively impact our business operations and the business prospects of our franchisees and subject us to incremental liability for their actions. Similarly, although our commercial relationships with our suppliers remain independent, there may be attempts to challenge that independence, which, if determined adversely, could also increase costs, negatively impact the business prospects of our suppliers, and subject us to incremental liability for their actions.Our results could also be affected by the following:•the relative level of our defense costs, which vary from period to period depending on the number, nature and procedural status of pending proceedings;•the cost and other effects of settlements, judgments or consent decrees, which may require us to make disclosures or take other actions that may affect perceptions of our brand and products; and•adverse results of pending or future litigation, including litigation challenging the composition and preparation of our products, or the appropriateness or accuracy of our marketing or other communication practices.A judgment significantly in excess of any applicable insurance coverage or third-party indemnity could materially adversely affect our financial condition or results of operations. Further, adverse publicity resulting from claims may hurt our business. If we are unable to effectively manage the risks associated with our complex regulatory and legal environment, it could have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition.
We are subject to income and other taxes in the U.S. and foreign jurisdictions, and our operations, plans and results are affected by tax and other initiatives around the world. In particular, we are affected by the impact of changes to tax laws or policy or related authoritative interpretations. We are also impacted by settlements of pending or any future adjustments proposed by taxing and governmental authorities inside and outside of the U.S. in connection with our tax audits, all of which will depend on their timing, nature and scope. Any significant increases in income tax rates, changes in income tax laws or unfavorable resolution of tax matters could have a material adverse impact on our financial results.
New accounting standards or changes in financial reporting requirements, accounting principles or practices, including with respect to our critical accounting estimates, could adversely affect our future results. We may also be affected by the nature and timing of decisions about underperforming markets or assets, including decisions that result in impairment or other charges that reduce our earnings.In assessing the recoverability of our long-lived assets, we consider changes in economic conditions and make assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows and other factors. These estimates are highly subjective and can be significantly impacted by many factors such as global and local business and economic conditions, operating costs, inflation, interest rate levels, competition, consumer and demographic trends and our restructuring activities. If our estimates or underlying assumptions change in the future, we may be required to record impairment charges. Any such changes could have a significant adverse effect on our reported results for the affected periods.
We are subject to legal and compliance risks and associated liability related to privacy and data protection requirements, including those associated with our technology-related services and platforms made available to business partners, customers, employees, franchisees or other third parties. An increasing number of our markets have enacted new privacy and data protection requirements (including the European Union’s General Data Protection Regulation and various U.S. state-level laws), and further requirements are likely to be proposed or enacted in the future. Failure to comply with these privacy and data protection laws could result in legal proceedings and substantial penalties and materially adversely impact our financial results or brand perceptions.
Our results of operations are substantially affected by economic conditions, including inflationary pressures, which can vary significantly by market and can impact consumer disposable income levels and spending habits. Economic conditions can be impacted by a variety of factors, including hostilities, epidemics, pandemics and actions taken by governments to manage national and international economic matters, whether through austerity, stimulus measures or trade measures, and initiatives intended to control wages, unemployment, credit availability, inflation, taxation and other economic drivers. Sustained adverse economic conditions or periodic adverse changes in economic conditions put pressure on our operating performance and business continuity disruption planning, and our business and financial results may suffer as a result.Our results of operations are also affected by fluctuations in currency exchange rates, and unfavorable currency fluctuations could adversely affect reported earnings.
Health epidemics or pandemics – such as the global outbreak of COVID-19 in early 2020 – have in the past and may in the future impact macroeconomic conditions, consumer behavior, labor availability and supply chain management, as well as local operations in impacted markets, all of which can adversely affect our business, financial results and outlook. Governmental responses to health epidemics or pandemics, including operational restrictions, can also affect the foregoing items and adversely affect our business and financial results. The duration and scope of a health epidemic or pandemic can be difficult to predict and depends on many factors, including the emergence of new variants and the availability, acceptance and effectiveness of preventative measures. A health epidemic or pandemic may also heighten other risks disclosed in these Risk Factors, including, but not limited to, those related to the availability and costs of labor and commodities, supply chain interruptions, consumer behavior, and consumer perceptions of our brand and industry.
The profitability of our Company-operated restaurants depends in part on our ability to anticipate and react to changes in commodity costs, including food, paper, supplies, fuel and utilities, as well as distribution and other operating costs, including labor. Volatility in certain commodity prices and fluctuations in labor costs have adversely affected and in the future could adversely affect our operating results by impacting restaurant profitability. The commodity markets for some of the ingredients we use, such as beef, chicken and pork, are particularly volatile due to factors such as seasonal shifts, climate conditions, industry demand and other macroeconomic conditions, international commodity markets, food safety concerns, product recalls, government regulation, and acts of war, terrorism or other hostilities, all of which are beyond our control and, in many instances, unpredictable. Our System can only partially address future price risk through hedging and other activities, and therefore increases in commodity costs could have an adverse impact on our profitability.
Our credit ratings may be negatively affected by our results of operations or changes in our debt levels. As a result, our interest expense, the availability of acceptable counterparties, our ability to obtain funding on favorable terms, our collateral requirements and our operating or financial flexibility could all be negatively affected, especially if lenders were to impose new operating or financial covenants.Our operations may also be impacted by regulations affecting capital flows, financial markets or financial institutions, which can limit our ability to manage and deploy our liquidity or increase our funding costs. Any such events could have a material adverse effect on our business and financial condition.
Many factors affect the trading volatility and price of our common stock in addition to our operating results and prospects. These factors, many of which are beyond our control, include the following:•the unpredictable nature of global economic and market conditions;•governmental action or inaction in light of key indicators of economic activity or events that can significantly influence financial markets, particularly in the U.S., which is the principal trading market for our common stock, and media reports and commentary about economic, trade or other matters, even when the matter in question does not directly relate to our business;•trading activity in our common stock, in derivative instruments with respect to our common stock or in our debt securities, which can be affected by: market commentary (including commentary that may be unreliable or incomplete); unauthorized disclosures about our performance, plans or expectations about our business; our actual performance and creditworthiness; investor confidence, driven in part by expectations about our performance; actions by shareholders and others seeking to influence our business strategies; portfolio transactions in our common stock by significant shareholders; and trading activity that results from the ordinary course rebalancing of stock indices in which McDonald’s may be included, such as the S&P 500 Index and the Dow Jones Industrial Average;•the impact of our stock repurchase program or dividend rate; and•the impact of corporate actions, including changes to our corporate structure, and market and third-party perceptions and assessments of such actions, including those we may take from time to time as we implement our business strategies in light of changing business, legal and tax considerations.
In recent years, there has been an increasing focus by stakeholders – including employees, franchisees, customers, suppliers, governmental and non-governmental organizations and investors – on ESG matters. A failure, whether real or perceived, to address ESG matters or to achieve progress on our ESG initiatives on the anticipated timing or at all, could adversely affect our business, including by heightening other risks disclosed in these Risk Factors, such as those related to consumer behavior, consumer perceptions of our brand, labor availability and costs, supply chain interruptions, commodity costs, and legal and regulatory complexity. Conversely, our taking a position, whether real or perceived, on ESG, public policy, geopolitical and similar matters could also adversely impact our business.The standards we set for ourselves regarding ESG matters, and our ability to meet such standards, may also impact our business. For example, we are working to manage risks and costs to our System related to climate change, greenhouse gases, and diminishing energy and water resources, and we have announced initiatives relating to, among other things, climate action, sustainability, responsible sourcing and increasing diverse representation across our System. We have faced increased scrutiny related to reporting on and achieving these initiatives, as well as continued public focus on similar matters, such as packaging and waste, animal health and welfare, deforestation and land use. We have also experienced increased pressure from stakeholders to provide expanded disclosure and establish additional commitments, targets or goals, and take actions to meet them, which could expose us to additional market, operational, execution and reputational costs and risks. Moreover, addressing ESG matters requires Systemwide coordination and alignment, and the standards by which certain ESG matters are measured are evolving and subject to assumptions that could change over time.
Severe weather conditions, natural disasters, acts of war, terrorism or other hostilities, social unrest or climate change (or expectations about them) can adversely affect consumer behavior and confidence levels, supply availability and costs and local operations in impacted markets, all of which can affect our results and prospects. Climate change may also increase the frequency and severity of weather-related events and natural disasters. Our receipt of proceeds under any insurance we maintain with respect to some of these risks may be delayed or the proceeds may be insufficient to cover our losses fully.