
For purposes of this discussion, “MetLife,” the “Company,” “we,” “our” and “us” refer to MetLife, Inc., a Delaware corporation incorporated in 1999, its subsidiaries and affiliates. This discussion should be read in conjunction with MetLife, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 (the “2022 Annual Report”), the cautionary language regarding forward-looking statements included below, the “Risk Factors” set forth in Part II, Item 1A, and the additional risk factors referred to therein, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk” and the Company’s interim condensed consolidated financial statements included elsewhere herein.This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations may contain or incorporate by reference information that includes or is based upon forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for cautionary language regarding forward-looking statements.This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations includes references to our performance measures, adjusted earnings and adjusted earnings available to common shareholders, that are not based on accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). See “— Non-GAAP and Other Financial Disclosures” for definitions and a discussion of these and other financial measures, and “— Results of Operations” and “— Investments” for reconciliations of historical non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
We continue to be impacted by the changing global financial and economic environment that has been affecting the industry.
Our business and results of operations are materially affected by conditions in the global financial markets and the economy generally due to our market presence in numerous countries, our large investment portfolio and the sensitivity of our insurance liabilities and derivatives to changing market factors. We are closely monitoring political and economic conditions that might contribute to global market volatility and impact our business operations, investment portfolio and derivatives, such as global inflation, supply chain disruptions, the Russia-Ukraine conflict, banking sector volatility and the COVID-19 pandemic. We are also monitoring the imposition of tariffs, sanctions or other barriers to international trade, changes to international trade agreements, and their potential impacts on our business, results of operations and financial condition. See “— Investments — Current Environment,” as well as “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Industry Trends — Impact of Market Interest Rates — Effects of Inflation” in the 2022 Annual Report.Governments and central banks around the world are using fiscal and monetary policies to address uncertain economic conditions. In the United States (“U.S.”), the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (“Federal Reserve Board”) and the Federal Open Market Committee took various actions in 2022 and in the beginning of 2023 to promote economic stability and combat inflation, including raising interest rates, although a heightened level of concern about an economic downturn in the U.S. remains, exacerbated by the recent banking turmoil. The European Central Bank and Bank of England have been taking similar actions. In contrast, the Bank of Japan (“BoJ”) has mostly kept its monetary policy settings on hold, reflecting a more cautious view on growth. The Japanese yen has weakened to its lowest level against the U.S. dollar since 2002 as monetary policy divergence has widened between the BoJ and the Federal Reserve Board.
Market interest rates are a key driver of our results. Increases and decreases in such rates, as well as extended periods of stagnation, may impact our business and investments in various ways. For discussion of the potential impact of low and rising interest rates, and inflation, as well as management actions to manage the impact of a changing U.S. interest rate environment, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Industry Trends — Impact of Market Interest Rates” and “Risk Factors — Economic Environment and Capital Markets Risks” included in the 2022 Annual Report.
See “Business — Competition” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Industry Trends — Competitive Pressures” in the 2022 Annual Report for information on our competitive position.
The following discussion on regulatory developments should be read in conjunction with “Business — Regulation” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Industry Trends — Regulatory Developments” included in the 2022 Annual Report, as amended or supplemented here.
On April 21, 2023, the Financial Stability Oversight Council (“FSOC”) proposed certain changes to how FSOC would designate non-bank financial companies as systemically important financial institutions (“non-bank SIFIs”). The proposed changes include a revised approach to non-bank SIFI designation based on risk factors contained in a proposed analytic framework, including leverage, liquidity risk and maturity mismatch, interconnections, operational risks, complexity, or opacity, inadequate risk management, concentration, and destabilizing activities, regardless of whether those risks arise from activities, firms, or otherwise. The proposed changes also include eliminating any requirement that FSOC conduct a cost-benefit analysis and an assessment of the likelihood of a non-bank financial company’s material financial distress before designating the non-bank financial company as a non-bank SIFI. The FSOC’s proposed changes, if adopted, could have the effect of simplifying and shortening FSOC’s procedures for designating non-bank financial companies as non-bank SIFIs and thus subject a non-bank financial company so designated to additional supervision, examination, and regulation. Any such designation would create uncertainties for the non-bank financial company regarding the likelihood, frequency or impact of any formal or informal regulatory or supervisory actions or inquiries; the scope of applicable regulatory or supervisory requirements or restrictions and the related compliance measures and internal controls; and the permissibility of certain activities or transactions. It is difficult to predict whether or the extent to which FSOC’s proposed changes would be adopted as proposed or if any further change would be made and any potential impact thereof.
In light of the rising interest rate environment, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (“NAIC”) is focused on identifying a solution for 2023 with regard to the treatment of an insurer’s negative interest maintenance reserve (“IMR”) balance, since this can impact how accurately the insurer’s surplus and financial strength are captured in its statutory financial statements due to lower surplus and risk-based capital (“RBC”) ratios. The NAIC has proposed new statutory accounting guidance that would permit an insurer with an RBC ratio greater than 300% to admit negative IMR of up to 5% of its general account capital and surplus, subject to certain restrictions and reporting obligations. Comments on the proposal are due in June 2023. The NAIC also intends to develop a long-term solution for this issue even if interest rates shift.The NAIC has been evaluating the risks associated with certain insurers’ investments in leveraged loans and collateralized loan obligations (“CLOs”). The NAIC is considering a proposal to assign risk weights to CLOs based on its own modeling as opposed to credit ratings. Under this proposal, the NAIC Structured Securities Group would model CLO investments and evaluate tranche level losses across all debt and equity tranches under a series of calibrated and weighted collateral stress scenarios to assign NAIC designations that minimize RBC arbitrage. The NAIC’s goal is to ensure that the aggregate RBC factor for owning all tranches of a CLO is similar to that required for owning all of the underlying loan collateral, in order to reduce RBC arbitrage. This change would be implemented at year-end 2024 at the earliest. It is currently unclear whether this will apply to all CLOs or only in specified cases. It is possible that the NAIC may propose new regulations or changes to statutory accounting principles regarding CLOs.
The Financial Conduct Authority (“FCA”), the United Kingdom (“U.K.”) regulator of the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), and the Intercontinental Exchange (“ICE”) Benchmark Administration, the administrator of LIBOR, have announced the cessation dates for the publication of all U.S. Dollar and non-U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings. The cessation dates of many of these settings have occurred and the cessation date of the remaining U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings (overnight and one-, three-, six- and 12-month U.S. Dollar LIBOR) will occur on June 30, 2023. The FCA has announced that the ICE Benchmark Administration will continue publication of one-, three- and six-month U.S. Dollar LIBOR settings on a “synthetic,” or non-representative, basis through the end of September 2024.
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to adopt accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported on the interim condensed consolidated financial statements. Effective January 1, 2023, the Company adopted a new accounting pronouncement related to targeted improvements to the accounting for long-duration contracts (“LDTI”) with a January 1, 2021 transition date (the “Transition Date”). The effects of adoption were therefore applied for years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, as described in Note 1 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. This summary of critical accounting estimates reflects this adoption. For a discussion of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. The most critical estimates include those used in determining:(i)future policy benefit liabilities (“FPBs”), market risk benefits (“MRBs”) and the accounting for reinsurance;(ii)estimated fair values of investments in the absence of quoted market values;(iii)investment allowance for credit loss (“ACL”) and impairments;(iv)estimated fair values of freestanding derivatives;(v)measurement of goodwill and related impairment;(vi)measurement of employee benefit plan liabilities;(vii)measurement of income taxes and the valuation of deferred tax assets; and(viii)liabilities for litigation and regulatory matters.Due to the adoption of LDTI, the measurement model for deferred policy acquisition costs (“DAC”) and value of business acquired (“VOBA”) changed and the majority of the embedded derivatives met the criteria to be accounted for as MRBs; therefore, we no longer believe that DAC, VOBA and embedded derivatives are critical accounting estimates. LDTI impacted the recognition and measurement of FPBs, MRBs and reinsurance, along with the resulting impacts to deferred income taxes which are described in further detail below. The other critical accounting estimates above were not impacted by the adoption of LDTI and are described in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates” and Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.In addition, the application of acquisition accounting requires the use of estimation techniques in determining the estimated fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed — the most significant of which relate to the aforementioned critical accounting estimates. In applying these policies and estimates, management makes subjective and complex judgments that frequently require assumptions about matters that are inherently uncertain. Many of these policies, estimates and related judgments are common in the insurance and financial services industries; others are specific to our business and operations. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Generally, FPBs are payable over an extended period of time and calculated as the present value of future expected benefits and claim settlement expenses to be paid, reduced by the present value of future expected net premiums. Such liabilities are established based on methods and underlying assumptions in accordance with GAAP and applicable actuarial standards. Principal assumptions used in the establishment of FPBs for traditional long-duration non-participating products are expectations related to mortality, morbidity, termination, claim settlement expense, policy lapse, renewal, retirement, disability incidence, disability terminations, inflation, and other contingent events as appropriate to the respective product type and geographical area. These assumptions are updated at least annually to reflect our expected experience for future periods. If net premiums exceed gross premiums (i.e., expected benefits exceed expected gross premiums), the FPBs are increased, and a corresponding adjustment is recognized in net income.Liabilities for unpaid claims are estimated based upon our historical experience and other actuarial assumptions that consider the effects of current developments, anticipated trends and risk management programs.Traditional non-participating long-duration and limited-payment contracts comprise the majority of MetLife’s FPBs, inclusive of deferred profit liabilities, as described in Note 3 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. For such contracts, cash flow assumptions are incorporated into the calculation of the FPBs, and are used to project the amount and timing of expected future benefits and claim settlement expenses to be paid and the expected future premiums to be collected for a cohort. Beginning on the Transition Date, the liabilities for these products are updated retrospectively on a quarterly basis for actual experience and at least once a year for any changes in cash flow assumptions. The change in FPBs reflected in the statement of operations is calculated using a locked-in discount rate. For products issued prior to the Transition Date, the Company developed a cohort level locked-in discount rate that reflects the interest accretion rates that were locked in at inception of the underlying contracts (unless there was a historical premium deficiency event that resulted in updating the interest accretion rate prior to the Transition Date), or the acquisition date for contracts acquired through an assumed in-force reinsurance transaction or a business combination. As described in Note 1 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, the upper-medium grade discount rate, which the Company generally interprets as a rate comparable to that of a U.S. corporate single A discount rate which reflects the duration characteristics of the liability, is used to discount the estimated cash flows and that discount rate is updated at each reporting period through other comprehensive income (loss) (“OCI”). We measure market risk related to our market sensitive traditional long-duration non-participating and limited-payment contracts based on changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates utilizing a sensitivity analysis. The results of this sensitivity analysis are included in “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk — Management of Market Risk Exposures.” We have also assessed the sensitivities of hypothetical changes in significant assumptions to reported amounts related to our traditional long-duration non-participating and limited-payment contracts, for products including, but not limited to, those within the disaggregated rollforwards included in Note 3 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, as reflected in the following tables:
(1)FPBs are inclusive of deferred profit liabilities where applicable to the sensitivity.(2)For products which are subject to morbidity risk, MetLife applied sensitivities to the incidence rate assumptions only.(3)For MetLife Holdings long-term care products, the lapse impacts include mortality as both mortality and lapse result in termination of these contracts without any additional benefit payment.
Traditional participating contracts comprise a significant portion of MetLife’s FPBs, as described in Note 3 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. For such contracts, original assumptions developed at the time of issue are locked-in and used in all future liability calculations provided the resulting liabilities are adequate to provide for future benefits and expenses (i.e., there is no premium deficiency). Therefore, liabilities for these products would not be impacted by changes in assumptions unless such change would result in an adverse impact that would trigger an establishment of a premium deficiency reserve. For these contracts, MetLife’s risk of adverse experience may be mitigated through adjustments to the dividend scales.Liabilities for universal and variable universal life secondary and paid-up guarantees are determined by estimating the expected value of death benefits payable when the account balance is projected to be zero and recognizing those benefits ratably over the accumulation period based on total expected assessments. The assumptions used in estimating the secondary and paid-up guarantee liabilities are mortality, lapse, and premium payment pattern and persistency. In addition, the projected account balance and assessments used in this calculation are impacted by the earned rate on investments and the interest crediting rates, which are typically subject to guaranteed minimums. The assumptions of investment performance and volatility for variable products’ separate account funds are consistent with historical experience of the appropriate underlying equity index, such as the S&P Global Ratings 500 Index. These assumptions are monitored and updated periodically based on market conditions and historical experience. For further information on additional insurance liabilities and the amounts included in the disaggregated rollforwards, see Note 3 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.For all insurance assets and liabilities, MetLife holds capital and surplus to mitigate potential adverse experience development. The Company’s approaches for managing liquidity and capital are described in “— Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
MRBs are contracts or contract features that guarantee benefits, such as guaranteed minimum benefits (referred to as “GMXBs”), in addition to an account balance which expose insurance companies to other than nominal capital market risk (equity price, interest rate, and/or foreign currency exchange risk) and protect the contractholder from the same risk. Certain contracts may have multiple contract features or guarantees that meet the definition of an MRB. Those benefits are aggregated and measured as a single compound MRB.All identified MRBs are required to be measured at estimated fair value, which is determined based on the present value of projected future benefits minus the present value of projected future fees attributable to those benefit features. The projections of future benefits and future fees require capital market and actuarial assumptions, including expectations concerning policyholder behavior. A risk neutral valuation methodology is used under which the cash flows from the guarantees are projected under multiple capital market scenarios using observable risk-free rates. The valuation of these MRBs also includes an adjustment for our nonperformance risk and risk margins for non-capital market inputs. The nonperformance risk adjustment, which is captured as a spread over the risk-free rate in determining the discount rate to discount the cash flows of the liability, is determined by taking into consideration publicly available information relating to spreads in the secondary market for MetLife, Inc.’s debt, including related credit default swaps. These observable spreads are then adjusted, as necessary, to reflect the priority of these liabilities and the claims paying ability of the issuing insurance subsidiaries compared to MetLife, Inc. Risk margins are established to capture the non-capital market risks of the instrument which represent the additional compensation a market participant would require to assume the risks related to the uncertainties in certain actuarial assumptions. The establishment of risk margins requires the use of significant management judgment, including assumptions of the amount and cost of capital needed to cover the guarantees.Changes in the estimated fair value of MRBs are recognized in net income, except for fair value changes attributable to a change in nonperformance risk of the Company which is recorded within OCI. The cost of MRBs may rise in volatile or declining equity markets or in a low interest rate environment. Market conditions including, but not limited to, changes in interest rates, equity indices, market volatility and foreign currency exchange rates, variations in actuarial assumptions regarding policyholder behavior, mortality and risk margins related to non-capital market inputs, may result in significant fluctuations in the estimated fair value of the guarantees that could materially affect net income, and changes in our nonperformance risk could materially affect OCI.We measure market risk related to our MRBs based on changes in interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates and equity market prices utilizing a sensitivity analysis. The results of this sensitivity analysis are included in “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk — Management of Market Risk Exposures.” We have also assessed the sensitivities of hypothetical changes in significant assumptions to reported amounts related to our MRBs for products included within the disaggregated rollforwards in Note 5 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, as reflected in the following table:
(1)In the valuation of MRBs, the Company applies a nonperformance risk adjustment, which is captured as a spread over the risk-free rate in determining the discount rate to discount the cash flows of the liability, determined by taking into consideration publicly available information relating to spreads in the secondary market for MetLife, Inc.’s debt, including related credit default swaps. These observable spreads are then adjusted, as necessary, to reflect the priority of these liabilities and the claims paying ability of the issuing insurance subsidiaries compared to MetLife, Inc.See Note 5 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information, including the significant inputs, judgments, valuation methods and assumptions used in the establishment of the MRBs, as well as the effect of changes in such factors on the measurement of our MRBs during the year. Also, see Note 11 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the fair value measurement of MRBs.
Accounting for reinsurance generally presents the income statement effect of direct policies on a net-of-reinsurance basis by using assumptions and methodologies consistent with those used to project the future performance of the underlying direct business. Further, the potential impact of counterparty credit risks are considered when measuring the reinsurance recoverable. We periodically review actual and anticipated experience compared to the aforementioned assumptions used to establish assets and liabilities relating to ceded and assumed reinsurance and evaluate the financial strength of counterparties to our reinsurance agreements using criteria similar to that evaluated in our security impairment process. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates — Investment Allowance for Credit Loss and Impairments” included in the 2022 Annual Report. Additionally, for each of our reinsurance agreements, we determine whether the agreement provides indemnification against loss or liability relating to insurance risk, in accordance with applicable accounting standards. We review all contractual features, including those that may limit the amount of insurance risk to which the reinsurer is subject or features that delay the timely reimbursement of claims. If we determine that a reinsurance agreement does not expose the reinsurer to a reasonable possibility of a significant loss from insurance risk, we record the agreement using the deposit method of accounting. The reinsurance recoverables associated with the FPBs and MRBs are not included in the sensitivities presented above as they are not considered significant in relation to the associated liabilities.
Our accounting for income taxes represents our best estimate of various events and transactions. Tax laws are often complex and may be subject to differing interpretations by the taxpayer and the relevant governmental taxing authorities. In establishing a provision for income tax expense, we must make judgments and interpretations about the application of inherently complex tax laws. We must also make estimates about when in the future certain items will affect taxable income in the various tax jurisdictions in which we conduct business.The Company considers all available factors, both positive and negative, to determine whether, based on the weight of these factors, a partial or full valuation allowance for categories of deferred tax assets is required. The weight given to these factors is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. Examples of factors considered in determining deferred tax asset realizability include past earnings history, projections of taxable income and tax planning strategies. Changes in tax laws and/or statutory tax rates in countries in which we operate could have an impact on our valuation of net deferred tax assets. Following the adoption of LDTI, if there were a 1% increase in the global effective income tax rate, the change would have resulted in an approximate $76 million increase in the net deferred income tax asset balance at December 31, 2022.
In March 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of Raven Capital Management, an alternative investment firm.
In December 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Affirmative Investment Management, a specialist global environmental, social and corporate governance impact fixed income investment manager.
In February 2022, the Company acquired approximately 15.0% ownership in PNB MetLife India Insurance Company Limited (“PNB MetLife”). As a result, the Company’s ownership in PNB MetLife, an operating joint venture accounted for under the equity method, increased to approximately 47.0%.
MetLife is one of the world’s leading financial services companies, providing insurance, annuities, employee benefits and asset management. MetLife is organized into five segments: U.S.; Asia; Latin America; Europe, the Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”); and MetLife Holdings. In addition, the Company reports certain of its results of operations in Corporate & Other. See Note 2 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the Company’s segments and Corporate & Other.
•Net income available to MetLife, Inc.’s common shareholders of $14 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to net income available to MetLife, Inc.’s common shareholders of $1.6 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022. •Adjusted earnings available to common shareholders of $1.2 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to adjusted earnings available to common shareholders of $1.7 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022.
Net income (loss) available to MetLife, Inc.’s common shareholders - Decreased $1.6 billion primarily due to the following:Net Investment Gains (Losses)(1) - Unfavorable change of $167 million ($132 million, net of income tax): •Higher losses on sales of fixed maturity securities •Higher provisions for credit loss on mortgage loans •Lower foreign currency transaction gains •Prior period provisions for credit loss on fixed maturity securities•Mark-to-market gains on equity securities in the current period, which are measured at fair value through net income (loss)Net Derivative Gains (Losses)(2) - Favorable change of $861 million ($680 million, net of income tax)(3):•Long-term interest rates decreased in the current period versus increased in the prior period - favorable impact to the estimated fair value of receive fixed interest rate swaps •Key equity indexes increased in the current period versus decreased in the prior period - unfavorable impact to equity options and total rate of return swaps (“TRRs”)Market Risk Benefits Remeasurement Gains (Losses)(4) - Unfavorable change of $1.6 billion ($1.3 billion, net of income tax):•Long-term interest rates decreased in the current period versus increased in the prior period •Key equity indexes increased in the current period versus decreased in the prior periodAdjusted Earnings(5) - Unfavorable change of $511 million. See “— Consolidated Results — Adjusted Earnings.”Taxes - Unfavorable change in effective tax rate - 67% current period versus 15% prior period•Current period effective tax rate on income before provision for income tax was 67% versus statutory rate of 21%:•Tax charges from foreign earnings taxed at higher statutory rates than the U.S. statutory rate and foreign losses taxed at lower statutory rates•Tax benefits from tax credits•Corporate tax deduction for stock compensation•Non-taxable investment income•Prior period effective tax rate on income before provision for income tax was 15% versus statutory rate of 21%:•Tax benefits from tax credits•Foreign earnings taxed at different rates than the U.S. statutory rate•Corporate tax deduction for stock compensation•Non-taxable investment income(1) See “— Investments — Overview” and “— Investments — Investment Portfolio Results — Net Investment Gains (Losses)” for information regarding management of our investment portfolio.(2) See “—Derivatives — Net Derivatives Gains (Losses)” for information regarding the use of derivatives to hedge market risk.(3) Includes amounts relating to investment hedge adjustments, which are also included in adjusted earnings available to common shareholders. See “— Investments — Investment Portfolio Results — Adjusted Net Investment Income” for additional information.
(5)  As used in “— Consolidated Results — Adjusted Earnings” and as more fully described in “— Non-GAAP and Other Financial Disclosures,” we refer to adjusted earnings, which does not equate to net income (loss), as determined in accordance with GAAP, to analyze our performance, evaluate segment performance, and allocate resources. We believe that the presentation of adjusted earnings and other financial measures based on adjusted earnings, as we measure it for management purposes, enhances the understanding of our performance by highlighting the results of operations and the underlying profitability drivers of the business. Adjusted earnings and other financial measures based on adjusted earnings allow analysis of our performance relative to our business plan and facilitate comparisons to industry results. Adjusted earnings should not be viewed as a substitute for net income (loss). Adjusted earnings available to common shareholders and adjusted earnings available to common shareholders on a constant currency basis should not be viewed as substitutes for net income (loss) available to MetLife, Inc.’s common shareholders.
(1)Amounts for U.S., MetLife Holdings and Corporate & Other are shown on a reported basis, as constant currency impact is not significant.
Business Overview. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased $967 million, or 8%, compared to the prior period. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues, net of foreign currency fluctuations, decreased $784 million, or 6%, compared to the prior period. This was primarily due to lower premiums in our U.S. segment driven by a decline in our Retirement and Income Solutions (“RIS”) business, partially offset by an increase in our Latin America segment due to strong sales and solid persistency across the region.
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax and foreign currency fluctuations. Foreign currency fluctuations can result in significant variances in the financial statement line items.Adjusted Earnings Available to Common Shareholders - Decreased $511 million primarily due to the following business drivers:Market Factors - Decreased adjusted earnings by $785 million•Recurring investment income increased - higher yields on fixed income securities and mortgage loans Underwriting and Other Insurance Adjustments - Increased adjusted earnings by $322 million:▪Favorable underwriting, primarily driven by an overall decline in COVID-19 related claims in our U.S. and Latin America segments
Business Overview. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased $1.0 billion, or 13%, compared to the prior period. This was primarily due to lower premiums in our RIS business, partially offset by growth in our Group Benefits business. The decrease in premiums in RIS was mainly driven by higher pension risk transfer sales in the prior period. Changes in RIS premiums are generally offset by a corresponding change in policyholder benefits. The increase in our Group Benefits business was primarily due to growth from our voluntary products and group term life, group disability and vision businesses, largely offset by a decrease in premiums related to our participating life contracts, which can fluctuate with claims experience.
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax.Adjusted Earnings - Increased $44 million primarily due to the following business drivers:    Market Factors - Decreased adjusted earnings by $206 million:•Higher average interest crediting rates on investment-type productsLargely offset by:•Recurring investment income increased - higher yields on fixed income securities and mortgage loans, and higher derivative incomeVolume Growth - Increased adjusted earnings by $44 million:•Positive flows from pension risk transfer transactions and funding agreement issuances resulted in higher average invested assets•Increase in interest credited expenses on long duration insurance productsUnderwriting and Other Insurance Adjustments - Increased adjusted earnings by $227 million:•Favorable mortality - Group Benefits - decreases in both incidence and severity of COVID-19 claimsExpenses - Decreased adjusted earnings by $21 million:•Higher direct expenses, including certain employee-related costs, exceeded the corresponding increase in premiums, fees and other revenues
Business Overview. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased $182 million, or 9%, compared to the prior period. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues, net of foreign currency fluctuations, increased $2 million, or less than 1%, compared to the prior period, as increases in Korea and Bangladesh were largely offset by a decrease in premiums from Japan’s yen-denominated life products.
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax and foreign currency fluctuations. Foreign currency fluctuations can result in significant variances in the financial statement line items.Adjusted Earnings - Decreased $319 million primarily due to the following business drivers:  Foreign Currency - Decreased adjusted earnings by $18 million:•Japanese yen, Korean won and Australian dollar weakened against the U.S. dollar Market Factors - Decreased adjusted earnings by $285 million: Volume Growth - Increased adjusted earnings by $10 million: •Positive net flows in Japan and Korea resulted in higher average invested assets•Higher sales across the region, primarily in Japan Underwriting and Other Insurance Adjustments - Decreased adjusted earnings by $13 million:•Refinements to certain insurance and other liabilities in the prior periodTaxes - Decreased adjusted earnings by $11 million:•Higher premium tax due to higher sales in Japan•Higher dividend withholding tax in Korea
Business Overview. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $336 million, or 32%, compared to the prior period. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues, net of foreign currency fluctuations, increased $285 million, or 26%, compared to the prior period, mainly driven by strong sales and solid persistency across the region.
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax and foreign currency fluctuations. Foreign currency fluctuations can result in significant variances in the financial statement line items.Adjusted Earnings - Increased $80 million primarily due to the following business drivers: Foreign Currency - Increased adjusted earnings by $7 million:•Mexican peso strengthened against the U.S. dollar Market Factors - Decreased adjusted earnings by $9 million:•Higher interest credited expenses on certain insurance liabilities Largely offset by:•Recurring investment income increased - higher yields on fixed income securities, primarily in Mexico, and an increase in bond index returns on our Chilean encaje within fair value option securities (“FVO Securities”)Volume Growth - Increased adjusted earnings by $41 million:•Higher sales across the region•Higher average invested assets, primarily in Chile and Mexico •Higher commissions and other variable expenses, net of DAC capitalization•Increase in interest credited expenses on certain insurance liabilities Underwriting and Other Insurance Adjustments - Increased adjusted earnings by $44 million:•Favorable underwriting - decline in COVID-19-related claims, primarily in MexicoExpenses - Decreased adjusted earnings by $6 million:•Higher employee-related costs
Business Overview. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased $20 million, or 3%, compared to the prior period. Adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues, net of foreign currency fluctuations, increased $30 million, or 5%, compared to the prior period primarily due to increases in our (i) corporate solutions businesses in the U.K., Egypt, and the Gulf, (ii) accident & health business across the region and (iii) credit life business in Turkey.
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax and foreign currency fluctuations. Foreign currency fluctuations can result in significant variances in the financial statement line items.Adjusted Earnings - Increased $5 million primarily due to the following business drivers:Foreign Currency - Decreased adjusted earnings by $9 million:•Egyptian pound, Turkish lira and euro weakened against U.S. dollarMarket Factors - Increased adjusted earnings by $7 million:•Recurring investment income increased - higher yields on fixed income securitiesVolume Growth - Increased adjusted earnings by $6 million: •Accident & health business across the region •Credit life business in Turkey•Corporate solutions business in EgyptUnderwriting and Other Insurance Adjustments - Increased adjusted earnings by $3 million: •Favorable underwriting - corporate solutions business in the U.K. and Egypt Largely offset by:•Unfavorable underwriting - corporate solutions business in the Gulf and accident & health business in Europe
Business Overview. Our MetLife Holdings segment consists of operations relating to products and businesses, previously included in our former retail business, that we no longer actively market in the U.S. For 2023, we anticipate an average decline in adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues of approximately 12% to 14% from expected business run-off. For 2024 and beyond, we expect this decline to be approximately 6% to 8% per year.
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax.Adjusted Earnings - Decreased $190 million primarily due to the following business drivers:Market Factors - Decreased adjusted earnings by $216 million:Volume Growth - Decreased adjusted earnings by $29 million:•Lower asset-based fee income •Lower average invested assets •Lower premiums due to business run-off and the impact of dividend scale reductions in both periods  •Decrease in DAC amortization due to business run-offUnderwriting and Other Insurance Adjustments - Increased adjusted earnings by $61 million:•Favorable underwriting - favorable mortality experience in our life business and less unfavorable morbidity experience in our long-term care business•Lower dividend expense due to dividend scale reductions, as well as run-off in the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (“MLIC”) closed block
The table below presents adjusted earnings available to common shareholders by source:
Unless otherwise stated, all amounts discussed below are net of income tax.Adjusted Earnings - Decreased $131 million primarily due to the following:Business Activities - Decreased adjusted earnings by $13 million:•Higher expenses associated with business growthNet Investment Income - Decreased adjusted earnings by $55 million:•Variable investment income decreased - lower equity market returns on our private equity funds Largely offset by:•Recurring investment income increased - higher yields on fixed income securities, higher market returns on FVO Securities and an increase in average invested assets Interest Expense on Debt - Decreased adjusted earnings by $24 million:•Senior note issuances in July 2022 and January 2023•LIBOR rate increase on surplus notes•Early senior note redemption in February 2023Other - Decreased adjusted earnings by $19 million: •Higher corporate-related expenses Taxes - Unfavorable change in Corporate & Other’s taxes:  •Lower utilization of tax preferenced items, which include non-taxable investment income, tax credits and foreign earnings taxed at different rates than the U.S. statutory rate•Higher taxes on stock compensation
We manage our investment portfolio using disciplined asset/liability management (“ALM”) principles, focusing on cash flow and duration to support our current and future liabilities. Our intent is to match the timing and amount of liability cash outflows with invested assets that have cash inflows of comparable timing and amount, while optimizing risk-adjusted investment income and risk-adjusted total return. Our investment portfolio is heavily weighted toward fixed income investments, with the vast majority of our portfolio invested in fixed maturity securities available-for-sale (“AFS”) and mortgage loans. These securities and loans have varying maturities and other characteristics which cause them to be generally well suited for matching the cash flow and duration of insurance liabilities.
As a global insurance company, we continue to be impacted by the changing global financial and economic environment, the fiscal and monetary policy of governments and central banks around the world and other governmental measures. Global inflation, supply chain disruptions, the Russia-Ukraine conflict, banking sector volatility and the COVID-19 pandemic continue to impact the global economy and financial markets and have caused volatility in the global equity, credit and real estate markets. See “— Industry Trends — Financial and Economic Environment” for further information regarding conditions in the global financial markets and the economy generally which may affect us. These factors may persist for some time and may continue to impact pricing levels of risk-bearing investments, as well as our business operations, investment portfolio and derivatives. Rising market interest rates have impacted our investment portfolio and derivatives. See “— Results of Operations — Consolidated Results” and “— Results of Operations — Consolidated Results — Adjusted Earnings” for impacts on our derivatives and analysis of the period over period changes in investment portfolio results and “Investments — Fixed Maturity Securities AFS — Evaluation of Fixed Maturity Securities AFS for Credit Loss — Evaluation of Fixed Maturity Securities AFS in an Unrealized Loss Position” in Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for impacts on the net unrealized gain (loss) on our fixed maturity securities AFS.
Selected Country: We have a market presence in numerous countries and, therefore, our investment portfolio, which supports our insurance operations and related policyholder liabilities, as well as our global portfolio diversification objectives, is exposed to risks posed by local political and economic conditions. The countries included in the following table have been the most affected by these risks. The table below presents a summary of selected country fixed maturity securities AFS, at estimated fair value, on a “country of risk basis” (e.g. where the issuer primarily conducts business).
(1)Sovereign includes government and agency.(2)The par value, amortized cost, net of ACL, and estimated fair value, net of purchased and written credit default swaps, of these securities were $684 million, $576 million and $356 million, respectively, at March 31, 2023. The notional value and estimated fair value of the net purchased credit default swaps were $200 million and $1 million, respectively, at March 31, 2023.(3)As of March 31, 2023, the amortized cost, ACL, and amortized cost, net of ACL, of our Russian Federation sovereign securities were $120 million, $79 million and $41 million, respectively; and the amortized cost, ACL and amortized cost, net of ACL, of our Russian Federation corporate securities were $2 million, $2 million and less than $1 million, respectively. As of March 31, 2023 the amortized cost, ACL and amortized cost, net of ACL, of our Ukraine sovereign securities were $88 million, $18 million and $70 million, respectively; and the amortized cost, ACL and amortized cost, net of ACL, of our Ukraine corporate securities were $3 million, $1 million and $2 million, respectively.Selected Sector: In the first quarter of 2023, portions of the global banking sector experienced volatility. Our exposure to U.S. regional banking sector fixed maturity securities AFS was $371 million, at estimated fair value, all of the which were investment grade rated, with unrealized losses of $12 million, at March 31, 2023. Our exposure to Credit Suisse fixed maturity securities AFS was $310 million, at estimated fair value, of which $293 million were investment grade rated, with unrealized losses of $19 million, at March 31, 2023. Of the $310 million Credit Suisse investment, $293 million were senior unsecured securities and $17 million were tier 2 subordinate securities. The U.S. regional banking sector and Credit Suisse exposures combined comprised less than 1% of cash and total invested assets at March 31, 2023. We maintain diversified banking sector securities portfolios which are broadly diversified across many sub-sectors and issuers.We manage direct and indirect investment exposure in the selected countries and sector through fundamental analysis and we continually monitor and adjust our level of investment exposure. We do not expect that our general account investments in these countries or the banking sector will have a material adverse effect on our results of operations or financial condition.
See “— Overview” for an overview of how we manage our investment portfolio. A reconciliation of net investment income under GAAP to adjusted net investment income and our yield table are presented below.
The following yield table presentation is consistent with how we measure our investment performance for management purposes, and we believe it enhances understanding of our investment portfolio results.
(1)We calculate yields using adjusted net investment income as a percent of average quarterly asset carrying values. Adjusted net investment income excludes realized gains (losses) from sales and disposals, and includes the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Average quarterly asset carrying values exclude unrealized gains (losses), collateral received in connection with our securities lending program, annuities funding structured settlement claims, freestanding derivative assets, collateral received from derivative counterparties and contractholder-directed equity securities. In addition, average quarterly asset carrying values include invested assets reclassified to held-for-sale, while ending carrying values exclude invested assets reclassified to held-for-sale. A yield is not presented for other invested assets, as it is not considered a meaningful measure of performance for this asset class.(2)Investment income (loss) from fixed maturity securities AFS includes amounts from FVO Securities of $48 million and ($65) million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(3)Investment income from fixed maturity securities AFS and mortgage loans includes prepayment fees.
See “— Results of Operations — Consolidated Results — Adjusted Earnings” for an analysis of the period over period changes in investment portfolio results.
We purchase investments to support our insurance liabilities and not to generate net investment gains and losses. However, net investment gains and losses are incurred and can change significantly from period to period due to changes in external influences, including changes in market factors such as interest rates, foreign currency exchange rates, credit spreads and equity markets; counterparty specific factors such as financial performance, credit rating and collateral valuation; and internal factors such as portfolio rebalancing. Changes in these factors from period to period can significantly impact the levels of provision for credit loss and impairments on our investment portfolio, as well as realized gains and losses on investments sold.See “— Results of Operations — Consolidated Results” for an analysis of the period over period changes in realized gains (losses) on investments sold, provision (release) for credit loss and impairments and non-investment portfolio gains (losses).
The following table presents public and private fixed maturity securities AFS and equity securities held at:
Included within fixed maturity securities AFS are structured securities, including residential mortgage-backed securities (“RMBS”), asset-backed securities and collateralized loan obligations (collectively, “ABS & CLO”) and commercial mortgage-backed securities (“CMBS”) (collectively, “Structured Products”). See “— Structured Products” for further information.See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Investments — Fixed Maturity Securities AFS and Equity Securities — Valuation of Securities” included in the 2022 Annual Report for further information on the processes used to value securities and the related controls.
Fixed maturity securities AFS and equity securities measured at estimated fair value on a recurring basis and their corresponding fair value pricing sources were as follows:
The majority of the Level 3 fixed maturity securities AFS and equity securities were concentrated in three sectors at March 31, 2023: U.S. corporate securities, foreign corporate securities and ABS & CLO. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, Level 3 fixed maturity securities AFS increased by $1.5 billion, or 5.2%. The increase was driven by purchases in excess of sales and by an increase in estimated fair value recognized in OCI, partially offset by transfers out of Level 3 in excess of transfers into Level 3.See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Investments — Fixed Maturity Securities AFS and Equity Securities — Valuation of Securities” included in the 2022 Annual Report for further information on the estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported above.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Investments — Fixed Maturity Securities AFS and Equity Securities — Fixed Maturity Securities AFS Credit Quality — Ratings” included in the 2022 Annual Report for a discussion of the credit quality ratings assigned by Nationally Recognized Statistical Rating Organizations (“NRSRO”), credit quality designations and designation categories assigned by the Securities Valuation Office of the NAIC for fixed maturity securities AFS and modeling methodologies adopted by the NAIC for non-agency RMBS and CMBS that estimate security level expected losses under a variety of economic scenarios.NRSRO ratings and NAIC designations are as of the dates shown below. Over time, credit ratings and designations can migrate, up or down, through the NRSRO’s and NAIC’s continuous monitoring process. NRSRO ratings are based on availability of applicable ratings. If no NRSRO rating is available, then an internally developed rating is used. If no NAIC designation is available, then, as permitted by the NAIC, an internally developed designation is used. NAIC designations are generally similar to the credit quality ratings of the NRSRO, except for (i) non-agency RMBS and CMBS and (ii) securities rated Ca or C by NRSROs, included within Caa and lower, that are designated NAIC 6; accordingly, NAIC designations may not correspond to NRSRO ratings.
The following table presents total fixed maturity securities AFS by NRSRO rating, except for non-agency RMBS and CMBS, which are presented using NAIC designations for modeled securities. In addition, in the following table, the applicable NAIC designation from the NAIC published comparison of NRSRO ratings to NAIC designations is provided.
The following tables present total fixed maturity securities AFS, at estimated fair value, by sector and by NRSRO rating, except for non-agency RMBS and CMBS, which are presented using NAIC designations for modeled securities. In addition, in the following table, the applicable NAIC designation from the NAIC published comparison of the NRSRO ratings to NAIC designations is provided.
We maintain a broadly diversified portfolio of corporate fixed maturity securities AFS across many industries and issuers. This portfolio did not have any exposure to any single issuer in excess of 1% of total investments at either March 31, 2023 or December 31, 2022. The top 10 holdings comprised 1% of total investments at both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. The table below presents our U.S. and foreign corporate securities portfolios by industry at:
(1)Includes consumer cyclical and consumer non-cyclical.(2)Includes basic industry, capital goods and other industrial.
Our investments in Structured Products are collateralized by residential mortgages, commercial mortgages, bank loans and other assets. Our investment selection criteria and monitoring include review of credit ratings, characteristics of the assets underlying the securities, borrower characteristics and the level of credit enhancement. We held $53.5 billion and $53.0 billion of Structured Products, at estimated fair value, at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively, as presented in the RMBS, ABS & CLO and CMBS sections below.
Our RMBS portfolio is broadly diversified by security type and risk profile. The following table presents our RMBS portfolio by security type, risk profile and ratings profile at:
(1)Other Non-Agency RMBS are broadly diversified across several subsectors and issuers, including securities collateralized by the following mortgage loan types: single family rental, early buyout securitization and small business commercial.See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Investments — Fixed Maturity Securities AFS and Equity Securities — Structured Products — RMBS” included in the 2022 Annual Report for further information about collateralized mortgage obligations and pass-through mortgage-backed securities, as well as agency, prime, prime investor, non-qualified residential mortgage (“NQM”), alternative (“Alt-A”), reperforming and sub-prime mortgage-backed securities.The majority of our RMBS holdings were rated Aaa and were designated NAIC 1 at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.We manage our exposure to reperforming and sub-prime RMBS holdings by focusing primarily on senior tranche securities, stress testing the portfolio with severe loss assumptions and closely monitoring the performance of the portfolio. Our reperforming RMBS are generally newer vintage securities and higher quality at purchase and remain investment grade under NAIC designations (e.g., NAIC 1 and NAIC 2). Our sub-prime RMBS portfolio consists predominantly of securities that were purchased at significant discounts to par value and discounts to the expected principal recovery value of these securities and are investment grade under NAIC designations (e.g., NAIC 1 and NAIC 2).
Our non-mortgage loan-backed structured securities are comprised of two broad categories of securitizations: ABS & CLO. These portfolios are broadly diversified by collateral type and issuer. The following table presents our ABS & CLO portfolios by collateral type and ratings profile at:
(1)Other ABS are broadly diversified across several subsectors and issuers, including securities with the following collateral types: foreign residential loans, transportation equipment and renewable energy.(2)Includes primarily securities collateralized by broadly syndicated bank loans.
Our CMBS portfolio is comprised primarily of conduit and single asset and single borrower securities. Conduit securities are collateralized by many commercial mortgage loans and are broadly diversified by property type, borrower and geography. The following tables present our CMBS portfolio by collateral type and ratings profile at.
The estimated fair value of these investments, which are primarily comprised of contractholder-directed investments supporting unit-linked variable annuity type liabilities (“Unit-linked investments”), was $10.1 billion and $9.7 billion, or 2.2% and 2.1% of cash and invested assets, at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. See Notes 1, 9 and 11 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of this portfolio, investments by asset type and the related cost or amortized cost, net unrealized gains (losses) and estimated fair value of these securities, as well as the fair value hierarchy at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022; and a rollforward of the fair value measurements for these investments measured at estimated fair value on a recurring basis using significant unobservable (Level 3) inputs and net realized and net unrealized gains (losses) recognized in net investment income for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
We participate in securities lending transactions, repurchase agreements and third-party custodian administered programs with unaffiliated financial institutions in the normal course of business for the purpose of enhancing the total return on our investment portfolio. Securities lending transactions and repurchase agreements: We account for these arrangements as secured borrowings and record a liability in the amount of the cash received. We obtain collateral, usually cash, from the borrower, which must be returned to the borrower when the securities are returned to us. Through these arrangements, we were liable for cash collateral under our control of $14.9 billion and $15.2 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively, including a portion that may require the immediate return of cash collateral we hold. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, as well as “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies — Investments — Securities Lending Transactions and Repurchase Agreements” in Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report for further information about the secured borrowings accounting and the classification of revenues and expenses. Third-party custodian administered programs: The estimated fair value of securities we own which are loaned in connection with these programs was $327 million and $324 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The estimated fair value of the related non-cash collateral on deposit with third-party custodians on our behalf, which is not reflected in our interim condensed consolidated financial statements and cannot be sold or re-pledged, was $334 million and $331 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.
Our mortgage loans are principally collateralized by commercial, agricultural and residential properties. Mortgage loans carried at amortized cost and the related ACL are summarized as follows at:
The carrying value of all mortgage loans, net of ACL, was 18.6% and 18.5% of cash and invested assets at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.We diversify our mortgage loan portfolio by both geographic region and property type to reduce the risk of concentration. Of our commercial and agricultural mortgage loans carried at amortized cost, 85% are collateralized by properties located in the U.S., with the remaining 15% collateralized by properties located primarily in Mexico, the U.K. and Australia at March 31, 2023. The carrying values of our commercial and agricultural mortgage loans located in California, New York and Texas were 16%, 9% and 7%, respectively, of total commercial and agricultural mortgage loans at March 31, 2023. Additionally, we manage risk when originating commercial and agricultural mortgage loans by generally lending up to 75% of the estimated fair value of the underlying real estate collateral.We manage our residential mortgage loans carried at amortized cost in a similar manner to reduce risk of concentration, with 91% collateralized by properties located in the U.S., and the remaining 9% collateralized by properties located primarily in Chile, at March 31, 2023. The carrying values of our residential mortgage loans located in California, Florida, and New York were 33%, 11%, and 8%, respectively, of total residential mortgage loans at March 31, 2023. Commercial Mortgage Loans by Geographic Region and Property Type. Commercial mortgage loans are the largest mortgage loan portfolio segment. The tables below present the diversification across geographic regions and property types of commercial mortgage loans carried at amortized cost at:
Our commercial mortgage loan portfolio is well positioned with exposures concentrated in high quality underlying properties located in primary markets typically with institutional investors who are better positioned to manage their assets during periods of market volatility. Our portfolio is comprised primarily of lower risk loans with higher debt service coverage ratios (“DSCR”) and lower loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratios. See “— Mortgage Loan Credit Quality — Monitoring Process” for further information and Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for a distribution of our commercial mortgage loans by DSCR and LTV ratios. Mortgage Loan Credit Quality — Monitoring Process. We monitor our mortgage loan investments on an ongoing basis, including a review of loans by credit quality indicator and loans that are current, past due, restructured and under foreclosure. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding mortgage loans by credit quality indicator, past due and nonaccrual mortgage loans. We review our commercial mortgage loans on an ongoing basis. These reviews may include an analysis of the property financial statements and rent roll, lease rollover analysis, property inspections, market analysis, estimated valuations of the underlying collateral, LTV ratios, DSCR and tenant creditworthiness. The monitoring process focuses on higher risk loans, which include those that are classified as restructured, delinquent or in foreclosure, as well as loans with higher LTV ratios and lower DSCR. The monitoring process for agricultural mortgage loans is generally similar, with a focus on higher risk loans, such as loans with higher LTV ratios. Agricultural mortgage loans are reviewed on an ongoing basis which include, but are not limited to, property inspections, market analysis, estimated valuations of the underlying collateral, LTV ratios and borrower creditworthiness, including reviews on a geographic and property-type basis. We review our residential mortgage loans on an ongoing basis, with a focus on higher risk loans, such as nonperforming loans. See Notes 1 and 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our evaluation of residential mortgage loans and related ACL methodology.LTV ratios and DSCR are common measures in the assessment of the quality of commercial mortgage loans. LTV ratios are a common measure in the assessment of the quality of agricultural mortgage loans. LTV ratios compare the amount of the loan to the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral. An LTV ratio greater than 100% indicates that the loan amount is greater than the collateral value. An LTV ratio of less than 100% indicates an excess of collateral value over the loan amount. Generally, the higher the LTV ratio, the higher the risk of experiencing a credit loss. The DSCR compares a property’s net operating income to amounts needed to service the principal and interest due under the loan. Generally, the lower the DSCR, the higher the risk of experiencing a credit loss. For our commercial mortgage loans, our average LTV ratio was 58% and 57% at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively, and our average DSCR was 2.4x and 2.6x at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The DSCR and the values utilized in calculating the ratio are updated routinely. In addition, the LTV ratio is routinely updated for all but the lowest risk loans as part of our ongoing review of our commercial mortgage loan portfolio. For our agricultural mortgage loans, our average LTV ratio was 47% at both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. The values utilized in calculating our agricultural mortgage loan LTV ratio are developed in connection with the ongoing review of our agricultural loan portfolio and are routinely updated.Mortgage Loan Allowance for Credit Loss. Our ACL is established for both pools of loans with similar risk characteristics and for mortgage loans with dissimilar risk characteristics, such as collateral dependent loans, individually and on a loan specific basis. We record an allowance for expected lifetime credit loss in earnings within net investment gains (losses) in an amount that represents the portion of the amortized cost basis of mortgage loans that the Company does not expect to collect, resulting in mortgage loans being presented at the net amount expected to be collected. In determining our ACL, management (i) pools mortgage loans that share similar risk characteristics, (ii) considers expected lifetime credit loss over the contractual term of our mortgage loans, as adjusted for expected prepayments and any extensions, and (iii) considers past events and current and forecasted economic conditions. Actual credit loss realized could be different from the amount of the ACL recorded. These evaluations and assessments are revised as conditions change and new information becomes available, which can cause the ACL to increase or decrease over time as such evaluations are revised. Negative credit migration, including an actual or expected increase in the level of problem loans, will result in an increase in the ACL. Positive credit migration, including an actual or expected decrease in the level of problem loans, will result in a decrease in the ACL. See Note 1 and 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information on how the ACL is established and monitored, and activity in and balances of the ACL.
Our real estate investments are comprised of wholly-owned properties, and interests in both real estate joint ventures and real estate funds which invest in a wide variety of properties and property types, including single and multi-property projects, and broadly diversified across multiple property types and geographies.The carrying value of our real estate investments was $13.2 billion and $13.1 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively, or 2.9% of cash and invested assets, at both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.Our real estate investments are typically stabilized properties that we intend to hold for the longer-term for portfolio diversification and long-term appreciation. Our real estate investment portfolio had significantly appreciated to a $6.4 billion unrealized gain position at March 31, 2023. We continuously monitor and assess our real estate investments for impairment when facts and circumstances indicate that the real estate may be impaired. There were no impairments (losses) recognized on our real estate investments for either the three months ended March 31, 2023 or 2022.We diversify our real estate investments by property type, form of equity interest (wholly-owned, joint venture and funds) and geographic region to reduce risk of concentration. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for a summary of our real estate investments, by income type, as well as income earned.
Other limited partnership interests are comprised of investments in private funds, including private equity funds and hedge funds. The carrying value of other limited partnership interests was $14.4 billion, at both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, which included $213 million and $414 million of hedge funds, respectively. Other limited partnership interests were 3.1% and 3.2% of cash and invested assets at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Cash distributions on these investments are generated from investment gains, operating income from the underlying investments of the funds and liquidation of the underlying investments of the funds.We use the equity method of accounting for most of our private equity funds. We generally recognize our share of a private equity fund’s earnings in net investment income on a three-month lag when the information is reported to us. Accordingly, changes in equity market levels, which can impact the underlying results of these private equity funds, are recognized in earnings within our net investment income on a three-month lag.
The following table presents the carrying value of our other invested assets by type at:
We enter into the following commitments in the normal course of business for the purpose of enhancing the total return on our investment portfolio: mortgage loan commitments and commitments to fund partnerships, bank credit facilities, bridge loans and private corporate bond investments. See Note 18 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for the amount of our unfunded investment commitments at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. See “Net Investment Income” and “Net Investment Gains (Losses)” in Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information on the investment income, investment expense, gains and losses from such investments and the liability for credit loss for unfunded mortgage loan commitments. See also “— Fixed Maturity Securities AFS and Equity Securities,” “— Mortgage Loans,” “— Real Estate and Real Estate Joint Ventures” and “— Other Limited Partnership Interests.”
We are exposed to various risks relating to our ongoing business operations, including interest rate, foreign currency exchange rate, credit and equity market. We use a variety of strategies to manage these risks, including the use of derivatives such as market standard purchased and written credit default swap contracts. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for: •A comprehensive description of the nature of our derivatives, including the strategies for which derivatives are used in managing various risks.•Information about the primary underlying risk exposure, gross notional amount, and estimated fair value of our derivatives by type of hedge designation, excluding embedded derivatives held at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.•The statement of operations effects of derivatives in net investments in foreign operations, cash flow, fair value, or nonqualifying hedge relationships for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.We enter into market standard purchased and written credit default swap contracts. Payout under such contracts is triggered by certain credit events experienced by the referenced entities. For credit default swaps covering North American corporate issuers, credit events typically include bankruptcy and failure to pay on borrowed money. For European corporate issuers, credit events typically also include involuntary restructuring. With respect to credit default contracts on sovereign debt, credit events typically include failure to pay debt obligations, repudiation, moratorium, or involuntary restructuring. In each case, payout on a credit default swap is triggered only after the relevant third party, Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee, determines that a credit event has occurred.We use purchased credit default swaps to mitigate credit risk in our investment portfolio. Generally, we purchase credit protection by entering into credit default swaps referencing the issuers of specific assets we own. In certain cases, basis risk exists between these credit default swaps and the specific assets we own. For example, we may purchase credit protection on a macro basis to reduce exposure to specific industries or other portfolio concentrations. In such instances, the referenced entities and obligations under the credit default swaps may not be identical to the individual obligors or securities in our investment portfolio. In addition, our purchased credit default swaps may have shorter tenors than the underlying investments they are hedging, which gives us more flexibility in managing our credit exposures. We believe that our purchased credit default swaps serve as effective economic hedges of our credit exposure.See “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk — Management of Market Risk Exposures — Hedging Activities” for more information about our use of derivatives by major hedge program.
Our policy is not to offset the fair value amounts recognized for derivatives executed with the same counterparty under the same master netting agreement. This policy applies to the recognition of derivatives on the consolidated balance sheets, and does not affect our legal right of offset.
The following table presents the gross notional amount and estimated fair value of credit default swaps at:
The following table presents the gross gains, gross losses and net gains (losses) recognized in net derivative gains (losses) for credit default swaps as follows:
(1)Gains (losses) do not include earned income (expense) on credit default swaps.The favorable change in net gains (losses) on written credit default swaps of $53 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 was due to certain credit spreads on certain credit default swaps used as replications narrowing in the current period as compared to widening in the prior period. The unfavorable change in net gains (losses) on purchased credit defaults swaps of $59 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022 was due to certain credit spreads on certain credit default swaps narrowing in the current period as compared to widening in the prior period.The maximum amount at risk related to our written credit default swaps is equal to the corresponding gross notional amount. In a replication transaction, we pair an asset on our balance sheet with a written credit default swap to synthetically replicate a corporate bond, a core asset holding of life insurance companies. Replications are entered into in accordance with the guidelines approved by state insurance regulators and the NAIC and are an important tool in managing the overall corporate credit risk within the Company. In order to match our long-dated insurance liabilities, we seek to buy long-dated corporate bonds. In some instances, these may not be readily available in the market, or they may be issued by corporations to which we already have significant corporate credit exposure. For example, by purchasing Treasury bonds (or other high-quality assets) and associating them with written credit default swaps on the desired corporate credit name, we can replicate the desired bond exposures and meet our ALM needs. In addition, given the shorter tenor of the credit default swaps (generally five-year tenors) versus a long-dated corporate bond, we have more flexibility in managing our credit exposures.
The valuation of Level 3 derivatives involves the use of significant unobservable inputs and generally requires a higher degree of management judgment or estimation than the valuations of Level 1 and Level 2 derivatives. Although Level 3 inputs are unobservable, management believes they are consistent with what other market participants would use when pricing such instruments and are considered appropriate given the circumstances. The use of different inputs or methodologies could have a material effect on the estimated fair value of Level 3 derivatives and could materially affect net income.Derivatives categorized as Level 3 at March 31, 2023 include: interest rate forwards with maturities which extend beyond the observable portion of the yield curve; foreign currency swaps and forwards with certain unobservable inputs, including the unobservable portion of the yield curve; and credit default swaps that are priced through independent broker quotations. At March 31, 2023, less than 1% of the estimated fair value of our derivatives was priced through independent broker quotations.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates — Derivatives” included in the 2022 Annual Report for further information on the estimates and assumptions that affect derivatives.
A portion our derivatives are designated and qualify as accounting hedges, which reduce volatility in earnings. For those derivatives not designated as accounting hedges, changes in market factors lead to the recognition of fair value changes in net derivative gains (losses) generally without an offsetting gain or loss recognized in earnings for the item being hedged, which creates volatility in earnings. We actively evaluate market risk hedging needs and strategies to ensure our free cash flow and capital objectives are met under a range of market conditions.Certain variable annuity products with guaranteed minimum benefits are accounted for as MRBs and measured at estimated fair value. We use freestanding derivatives to hedge the market risks inherent in these variable annuity guarantees. We continuously review and refine our hedging strategy in light of changing economic and market conditions, evolving NAIC and the New York Department of Financial Services (“NYDFS”) statutory requirements, and accounting rule changes. As a part of our current hedging strategy, we maintain portfolio level derivatives in our macro hedge program. These macro hedge program derivatives mitigate the potential deterioration in our capital positions from significant adverse economic conditionsSee “— Results of Operations — Consolidated Results” for an analysis of the period over period changes.
We enter into derivatives to manage various risks relating to our ongoing business operations. We receive non-cash collateral from counterparties for derivatives, which can be sold or re-pledged subject to certain constraints, and which is not reflected on our interim condensed consolidated balance sheets. The amounts of this non-cash collateral were $2.5 billion and $1.7 billion, at estimated fair value, at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. See “— Liquidity and Capital Resources — The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses — Pledged Collateral” and Note 10 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding the earned income on and the gross notional amount, estimated fair value of assets and liabilities and primary underlying risk exposure of our derivatives.
We establish, and carry as liabilities, actuarially determined amounts that are calculated to meet policy obligations or to provide for future annuity payments. Amounts for actuarial liabilities are computed and reported on the interim condensed consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP. For more details on Policyholder Liabilities, see “— Summary of Critical Accounting Estimates.” See also Notes 1, 3, 4 and 5 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Our business and results of operations are materially affected by conditions in the global financial markets and the economy generally due to our market presence in numerous countries, large investment portfolio and the sensitivity of our insurance liabilities and derivatives to changing market factors. See “— Industry Trends — Financial and Economic Environment” and “— Investments — Current Environment” for further information regarding such conditions which may affect our financing costs and market interest for our debt or equity securities and market factors that could affect our ability to meet liquidity and capital needs.
Based upon the strength of our franchise, diversification of our businesses, strong financial fundamentals and the substantial funding sources available to us as described herein, we continue to believe we have access to ample liquidity to meet business requirements under current market conditions and reasonably possible stress scenarios. We continuously monitor and adjust our liquidity and capital plans for MetLife, Inc. and its subsidiaries in light of market conditions, as well as changing needs and opportunities.
We maintain a substantial short-term liquidity position, which was $13.6 billion and $16.4 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Short-term liquidity includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments, excluding assets that are pledged or otherwise committed, including amounts received in connection with securities lending, repurchase agreements, derivatives, and secured borrowings, as well as amounts held in the closed block.
An integral part of our liquidity management includes managing our level of liquid assets, which was $181.2 billion and $180.4 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Liquid assets include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and publicly-traded securities, excluding assets that are pledged or otherwise committed. Assets pledged or otherwise committed include amounts received in connection with securities lending, repurchase agreements, derivatives, regulatory deposits, the collateral financing arrangement, funding agreements and secured borrowings, as well as amounts held in the closed block.
We have established several senior management committees as part of our capital management process. These committees, including the Capital Management Committee and the Enterprise Risk Committee (“ERC”), regularly review actual and projected capital levels (under a variety of scenarios including stress scenarios) and our annual capital plan in accordance with our capital policy. The Capital Management Committee is comprised of members of senior management, including MetLife, Inc.’s Chief Financial Officer (“CFO”), Treasurer, and Chief Risk Officer (“CRO”). The ERC is also comprised of members of senior management, including MetLife, Inc.’s CFO, CRO and Chief Investment Officer.MetLife, Inc.’s Board of Directors (“Board of Directors”) and senior management are directly involved in the development and maintenance of our capital policy. The capital policy sets forth, among other things, minimum and target capital levels and the governance of the capital management process. All capital actions, including proposed changes to the annual capital plan, capital targets or capital policy, are reviewed by the Finance and Risk Committee of the Board of Directors prior to obtaining full Board of Directors approval. The Board of Directors approves the capital policy and the annual capital plan and authorizes capital actions, as required.See “Risk Factors — Capital Risks — We May Not be Able to Pay Dividends or Repurchase Our Stock Due to Legal and Regulatory Restrictions or Cash Buffer Needs” and Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report for information regarding restrictions on payment of dividends and stock repurchases. See also “— The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses — Common Stock Repurchases” for information regarding MetLife, Inc.’s common stock repurchase authorizations.
Liquidity refers to the ability to generate adequate amounts of cash to meet our needs. In the event of significant cash requirements beyond anticipated liquidity needs, we have various alternatives available depending on market conditions and the amount and timing of the liquidity need. These available alternatives include cash flows from operations, sales of liquid assets, global funding sources including commercial paper and various credit and committed facilities. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition — Liquidity and Capital Resources — The Company — Liquidity” included in the 2022 Annual Report.
We manage our capital position to maintain our financial strength and credit ratings. Our capital position is supported by our ability to generate strong cash flows within our operating companies and borrow funds at competitive rates, as well as by our demonstrated ability to raise additional capital to meet operating and growth needs despite adverse market and economic conditions.
Our primary sources and uses of liquidity and capital are summarized as follows:
The principal cash inflows from our insurance activities come from insurance premiums, net investment income, annuity considerations and deposit funds. The principal cash outflows are the result of various life insurance, annuity and pension products, operating expenses and income tax, as well as interest expense.
The principal cash inflows from our investment activities come from repayments of principal, proceeds from maturities and sales of investments and settlements of freestanding derivatives. The principal cash outflows relate to purchases of investments, issuances of policy loans and settlements of freestanding derivatives. In addition, cash inflows and outflows relate to sales and purchases of businesses. We typically have a net cash outflow from investing activities because cash inflows from insurance operations are reinvested in accordance with our ALM discipline to fund insurance liabilities. We closely monitor and manage these risks through our comprehensive investment risk management process.
The principal cash inflows from our financing activities come from issuances of debt and other securities, deposits of funds associated with policyholder account balances and lending of securities. The principal cash outflows come from repayments of debt and the collateral financing arrangement, payments of dividends on and repurchases or redemptions of MetLife, Inc.’s securities, withdrawals associated with policyholder account balances and the return of securities on loan.
In addition to the general description of liquidity and capital sources in “— Summary of the Company’s Primary Sources and Uses of Liquidity and Capital,” the Company’s primary sources of liquidity and capital are set forth below.
Liquidity is provided by a variety of global funding sources, including funding agreements, credit and committed facilities and commercial paper. Capital is provided by a variety of global funding sources, including short-term and long-term debt, the collateral financing arrangement, junior subordinated debt securities, preferred securities, equity securities and equity-linked securities. MetLife, Inc. maintains a shelf registration statement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission that permits the issuance of public debt, equity and hybrid securities. As a “Well-Known Seasoned Issuer” under U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission rules, MetLife, Inc.’s shelf registration statement provides for automatic effectiveness upon filing and has no stated issuance capacity. The diversity of our global funding sources enhances our funding flexibility, limits dependence on any one market or source of funds and generally lowers the cost of funds. Our primary global funding sources include:
For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, MetLife, Inc. issued 1,693,605 and 2,886,682 new shares of its common stock, respectively, for $98 million and $141 million, respectively, to satisfy various stock option exercises and other stock-based awards.
MetLife, Inc. and MetLife Funding, Inc. (“MetLife Funding”), a subsidiary of MLIC, each have a commercial paper program that is supported by our unsecured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”). See “— Credit and Committed Facilities.” MetLife Funding raises cash from its commercial paper program and uses the proceeds to extend loans through MetLife Credit Corp., another subsidiary of MLIC, to affiliates in order to enhance the financial flexibility and liquidity of these companies.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Liquidity and Capital Resources — The Company — Liquidity and Capital Sources — Global Funding Sources — Policyholder Account Balances” included in the 2022 Annual Report for information regarding the Company’s contractual obligations related to future policy benefits and policyholder account balances.
Certain of our U.S. insurance subsidiaries are members of the FHLBNY. For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we issued $7.7 billion and $7.7 billion, respectively, and repaid $7.3 billion and $7.2 billion, respectively, of funding agreements with FHLBNY. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, total obligations outstanding under these funding agreements were $15.3 billion and $14.9 billion, respectively. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
We issue fixed and floating rate funding agreements, which are denominated in either U.S. dollars or foreign currencies, to certain unconsolidated special purpose entities that have issued either debt securities or commercial paper for which payment of interest and principal is secured by such funding agreements. For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we issued $13.2 billion and $14.9 billion, respectively, and repaid $14.7 billion and $12.4 billion, respectively, under such funding agreements. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, total obligations outstanding under these funding agreements were $40.0 billion and $40.7 billion, respectively. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
We have issued funding agreements to a subsidiary of the Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation which are secured by a pledge of certain eligible agricultural mortgage loans. For each of the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, there were no issuances or repayments under such funding agreements. At both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, total obligations outstanding under these funding agreements were $2.1 billion. See Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
At March 31, 2023, we maintained our $3.0 billion Credit Facility and certain committed facilities aggregating $3.2 billion, to which MetLife, Inc. is a party and/or guarantor. When drawn upon, these facilities bear interest at varying rates in accordance with the respective agreements.The Credit Facility is used for general corporate purposes, to support the borrowers’ commercial paper programs and for the issuance of letters of credit. At March 31, 2023, we had outstanding $262 million in letters of credit and no drawdowns against this facility. Remaining availability was $2.7 billion at March 31, 2023.The committed facilities are used as collateral for certain of our affiliated reinsurance liabilities. At March 31, 2023, we had outstanding $2.8 billion in letters of credit and no drawdowns against these facilities. Remaining availability was $406 million at March 31, 2023.
We have no reason to believe that our lending counterparties will be unable to fulfill their respective contractual obligations under these facilities. As commitments under our credit and committed facilities may expire unused, these amounts do not necessarily reflect our actual future cash funding requirements.
The following table summarizes our outstanding debt at:
(1)Includes $70 million and $76 million of short-term debt that is non-recourse to MetLife, Inc. and MLIC, subject to customary exceptions, at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Certain subsidiaries have pledged assets to secure this debt.(2)Includes $442 million and $447 million of long-term debt that is non-recourse to MetLife, Inc. and MLIC, subject to customary exceptions, at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Certain investment subsidiaries have pledged assets to secure this debt.
Certain of our debt instruments and committed facilities, as well as our Credit Facility, contain various administrative, reporting, legal and financial covenants. We believe we were in compliance with all applicable financial covenants at March 31, 2023.
In addition to the general description of liquidity and capital uses in “— Summary of the Company’s Primary Sources and Uses of Liquidity and Capital,” the Company’s primary uses of liquidity and capital are set forth below.
See Note 13 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information relating to authorizations by the Board of Directors to repurchase MetLife, Inc. common stock, amounts of common stock repurchased pursuant to such authorizations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, and the amount remaining under such authorizations at March 31, 2023.On May 3, 2023, MetLife, Inc. announced that its Board of Directors authorized an additional $3.0 billion of common stock repurchases.Common stock repurchases are subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors and will depend upon our capital position, liquidity, financial strength and credit ratings, general market conditions, the market price of MetLife, Inc.’s common stock compared to management’s assessment of the stock’s underlying value, applicable regulatory approvals, and other legal and accounting factors. Restrictions on the payment of dividends that may arise under so-called “Dividend Stopper” provisions would also restrict MetLife, Inc.’s ability to repurchase common stock. See “— Dividends” for information on these restrictions. See also, “Business — Regulation,” “Risk Factors — Capital Risks — We May Not be Able to Pay Dividends or Repurchase Our Stock Due to Legal and Regulatory Restrictions or Cash Buffer Needs” and Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, MetLife, Inc. paid dividends on its preferred stock of $66 million and $63 million, respectively. In each of the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, MetLife, Inc. paid dividends on its common stock of $389 million and $397 million, respectively.The declaration and payment of common stock dividends are subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors, and will depend on MetLife, Inc.’s financial condition, results of operations, cash requirements, future prospects, regulatory restrictions on the payment of dividends by MetLife, Inc.’s insurance subsidiaries and other factors deemed relevant by the Board of Directors.
The payment of dividends is also subject to restrictions under the terms of our preferred stock and junior subordinated debentures in situations where we may be experiencing financial stress. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Liquidity and Capital Resources — The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses — Dividends — ‘Dividend Stopper’ Provisions in MetLife’s Preferred Stock and Junior Subordinated Debentures,” “Risk Factors — Capital Risks — We May Not be Able to Pay Dividends or Repurchase Our Stock Due to Legal and Regulatory Restrictions or Cash Buffer Needs” and Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
For each of the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, following regulatory approval, MetLife Reinsurance Company of Charleston, a wholly-owned subsidiary of MetLife, Inc., repurchased and canceled $12 million in aggregate principal amount of its surplus notes, which were reported in collateral financing arrangement on the interim condensed consolidated balance sheets.
We may from time to time seek to retire or purchase our outstanding debt through cash purchases, redemptions and/or exchanges for other securities, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Any such repurchases, redemptions, or exchanges will be dependent upon several factors, including our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions, general market conditions, and applicable regulatory, legal and accounting factors. Whether or not to repurchase or redeem any debt and the size and timing of any such repurchases or redemptions will be determined at our discretion.See Note 12 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information on the redemption and cancellation of MetLife, Inc.’s senior notes.
MetLife, Inc. and several of its subsidiaries (each, an “Obligor”) are parties to various capital support commitments and guarantees with subsidiaries. Under these arrangements, each Obligor has agreed to cause the applicable entity to meet specified capital and surplus levels or has guaranteed certain contractual obligations. We anticipate that in the event these arrangements place demands upon us, there will be sufficient liquidity and capital to enable us to meet such demands. See Note 5 of the Notes to the MetLife, Inc. (Parent Company Only) Condensed Financial Information included in the 2022 Annual Report.
Liabilities arising from our insurance activities primarily relate to benefit payments under various life insurance, annuity and group pension products, as well as payments for policy surrenders, withdrawals and loans. For annuity or deposit type products, surrender or lapse behavior differs somewhat by segment. In the MetLife Holdings segment, which includes individual annuities, lapses and surrenders tend to occur in the normal course of business. For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, general account surrenders and withdrawals from annuity products were $531 million and $323 million, respectively. In the RIS business within the U.S. segment, which includes pension risk transfers, bank-owned life insurance and other fixed annuity contracts, as well as funding agreements and other capital market products, most of the products offered have fixed maturities or fairly predictable surrenders or withdrawals. With regard to the RIS business products that provide customers with limited rights to accelerate payments, at March 31, 2023 there were funding agreements totaling $131 million that could be put back to the Company. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Liquidity and Capital Resources — The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses — Insurance Liabilities” included in the 2022 Annual Report for additional information.
We pledge collateral to, and have collateral pledged to us by, counterparties in connection with our derivatives. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we had received pledged cash collateral from counterparties of $5.0 billion and $5.7 billion, respectively. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we had pledged cash collateral to counterparties of $256 million and $423 million, respectively. See Note 10 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information about collateral pledged to us, collateral we pledge and derivatives subject to credit contingent provisions.We pledge collateral and have had collateral pledged to us, and may be required from time to time to pledge additional collateral or be entitled to have additional collateral pledged to us, in connection with the collateral financing arrangement related to the reinsurance of closed block liabilities.We pledge collateral from time to time in connection with funding agreements and advance agreements. See Note 9 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, as well as Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
See “— Investments — Securities Lending Transactions, Repurchase Agreements and Third-Party Custodian Administered Programs.”
We establish liabilities for litigation and regulatory loss contingencies when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. For material matters where a loss is believed to be reasonably possible but not probable, no accrual is made but we disclose the nature of the contingency and an aggregate estimate of the reasonably possible range of loss in excess of amounts accrued, when such an estimate can be made. It is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of all pending investigations and legal proceedings. In some of the matters referred to herein, very large and/or indeterminate amounts, including punitive and treble damages, are sought. Given the large and/or indeterminate amounts sought in certain of these matters and the inherent unpredictability of litigation, it is possible that an adverse outcome in certain matters could, from time to time, have a material adverse effect on our consolidated net income or cash flows in particular quarterly or annual periods. See Note 18 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and capital are managed to preserve stable, reliable and cost-effective sources of cash to meet all current and future financial obligations and are provided by a variety of sources, including a portfolio of liquid assets, a diversified mix of short- and long-term funding sources from the wholesale financial markets and the ability to borrow through credit and committed facilities. Liquidity is monitored through the use of internal liquidity risk metrics, including the composition and level of the liquid asset portfolio, timing differences in short-term cash flow obligations, access to the financial markets for capital and debt transactions and exposure to contingent draws on MetLife, Inc.’s liquidity. MetLife, Inc. is an active participant in the global financial markets through which it obtains a significant amount of funding. These markets, which serve as cost-effective sources of funds, are critical components of MetLife, Inc.’s liquidity and capital management. Decisions to access these markets are based upon relative costs, prospective views of balance sheet growth and a targeted liquidity profile and capital structure. A disruption in the financial markets could limit MetLife, Inc.’s access to liquidity.MetLife, Inc.’s ability to maintain regular access to competitively priced wholesale funds is fostered by its current credit ratings from the major credit rating agencies. We view our capital ratios, credit quality, stable and diverse earnings streams, diversity of liquidity sources and our liquidity monitoring procedures as critical to retaining such credit ratings. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Liquidity and Capital Resources — The Company — Rating Agencies” included in the 2022 Annual Report.
For a summary of MetLife, Inc.’s liquidity, see “— The Company — Liquidity.”
For a summary of MetLife, Inc.’s capital, see “— The Company — Capital.” See also “— The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses — Common Stock Repurchases” for information regarding MetLife, Inc.’s common stock repurchases.
At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, MetLife, Inc., collectively with other MetLife holding companies, had $4.2 billion and $5.4 billion, respectively, in liquid assets. Of these amounts, $3.0 billion and $4.5 billion were held by MetLife, Inc. and $1.2 billion and $909 million were held by other MetLife holding companies at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Liquid assets include cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and publicly-traded securities, excluding assets that are pledged or otherwise committed. Assets pledged or otherwise committed include amounts received in connection with derivatives and a collateral financing arrangement.See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Liquidity and Capital Resources — MetLife, Inc. — Liquid Assets” included in the 2022 Annual Report for additional information on the sources and uses of liquid assets, as well as sources and uses of liquid assets included in free cash flow for MetLife, Inc. and other MetLife holding companies.
In addition to the description of liquidity and capital sources in “— The Company — Summary of the Company’s Primary Sources and Uses of Liquidity and Capital” and “— The Company — Liquidity and Capital Sources,” MetLife, Inc.’s primary sources of liquidity and capital are set forth below.
MetLife, Inc. relies, in part, on dividends from its subsidiaries to meet its cash requirements. MetLife, Inc.’s insurance subsidiaries are subject to regulatory restrictions on the payment of dividends imposed by the regulators of their respective domiciles. The dividend limitation for U.S. insurance subsidiaries is generally based on the surplus to policyholders at the end of the immediately preceding calendar year and statutory net gain from operations for the immediately preceding calendar year. Statutory accounting practices, as prescribed by insurance regulators of various states in which we conduct business, differ in certain respects from accounting principles used in financial statements prepared in conformity with GAAP. The significant differences relate to the treatment of DAC, certain deferred income tax, required investment liabilities, statutory reserve calculation assumptions, goodwill and surplus notes.The table below sets forth the dividends permitted to be paid in 2023 by MetLife, Inc.’s primary U.S. insurance subsidiaries without insurance regulatory approval and the actual dividends paid for the three months ended March 31, 2023:
(1)Reflects all amounts paid, including those where regulatory approval was obtained as required.(2)Reflects dividend amounts that may be paid during 2023 without prior regulatory approval. However, because dividend tests may be based on dividends previously paid over rolling 12-month periods, if paid before a specified date during 2023, some or all of such dividends may require regulatory approval.In addition to the amounts presented in the table above, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, MetLife, Inc. also received from certain other subsidiaries cash dividends of $9 million.The dividend capacity of our non-U.S. operations is subject to similar restrictions established by the local regulators. The non-U.S. regulatory regimes also commonly limit dividend payments to the parent company to a portion of the subsidiary’s prior year statutory income, as determined by the local accounting principles. The regulators of our non-U.S. operations, including Japan’s Financial Services Agency, may also limit or not permit profit repatriations or other transfers of funds to the U.S. if such transfers are deemed to be detrimental to the solvency or financial strength of the non-U.S. operations, or for other reasons. Most of our non-U.S. subsidiaries are second tier subsidiaries which are owned by various non-U.S. holding companies. The capital and rating considerations applicable to our first tier subsidiaries may also impact the dividend flow into MetLife, Inc.We proactively manage target and excess capital levels and dividend flows and forecast local capital positions as part of the financial planning cycle. The dividend capacity of certain U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiaries is also subject to business targets in excess of the minimum capital necessary to maintain the desired rating or level of financial strength in the relevant market. See “Risk Factors — Capital Risks — Our Subsidiaries May be Unable to Pay Dividends, a Major Component of Holding Company Free Cash Flow” and Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in the 2022 Annual Report.
See “— The Company — Liquidity and Capital Sources — Global Funding Sources — Credit and Committed Facilities” for further information regarding the Company’s Credit Facility and certain committed facilities.
The following table summarizes the outstanding long-term debt of MetLife, Inc. at:
Certain of MetLife, Inc.’s debt instruments and committed facilities, as well as its Credit Facility, contain various administrative, reporting, legal and financial covenants. MetLife, Inc. believes it was in compliance with all applicable financial covenants at March 31, 2023.
The primary uses of liquidity of MetLife, Inc. include debt service, cash dividends on common and preferred stock, capital contributions to subsidiaries, common stock, preferred stock and debt repurchases and/or redemptions, payment of general operating expenses and acquisitions. Based on our analysis and comparison of our current and future cash inflows from the dividends we receive from subsidiaries that are permitted to be paid without prior insurance regulatory approval, our investment portfolio and other cash flows and anticipated access to the capital markets, we believe there will be sufficient liquidity and capital to enable MetLife, Inc. to make payments on debt, pay cash dividends on its common and preferred stock, contribute capital to its subsidiaries, repurchase its common stock and certain of its other securities, pay all general operating expenses and meet its cash needs under current market conditions and reasonably possible stress scenarios.In addition to the description of liquidity and capital uses in “— The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses,” MetLife, Inc.’s primary uses of liquidity and capital are set forth below.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, MetLife, Inc. invested a net amount of $173 million and $9 million, respectively, in various subsidiaries. MetLife, Inc. lends funds, as necessary, through credit agreements or otherwise to its subsidiaries and affiliates, some of which are regulated, to meet their capital requirements or to provide liquidity. MetLife, Inc. had loans to subsidiaries outstanding of $555 million and $95 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.
MetLife, Inc. is party to various capital support commitments and guarantees with certain of its subsidiaries. Under these arrangements, MetLife, Inc. has agreed to cause each such entity to meet specified capital and surplus levels or has guaranteed certain contractual obligations. See “— The Company — Liquidity and Capital Uses — Support Agreements.”
In this report, the Company presents certain measures of its performance on a consolidated and segment basis that are not calculated in accordance with GAAP. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures enhance the understanding for the Company and our investors of our performance by highlighting the results of operations and the underlying profitability drivers of our business. Segment-specific financial measures are calculated using only the portion of consolidated results attributable to that specific segment.The following non-GAAP financial measures should not be viewed as substitutes for the most directly comparable financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP:
Any of these financial measures shown on a constant currency basis reflect the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and are calculated using the average foreign currency exchange rates for the most recent period and applied to the comparable prior period (“constant currency basis”). Reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable historical GAAP financial measures are included in “— Results of Operations” and “— Investments.” Reconciliations of these non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures are not accessible on a forward-looking basis because we believe it is not possible without unreasonable effort to provide other than a range of net investment gains and losses and net derivative gains and losses, which can fluctuate significantly within or outside the range and from period to period and may have a material impact on net income. Our definitions of non-GAAP and other financial measures discussed in this report may differ from those used by other companies.
•adjusted earnings; •adjusted earnings available to common shareholders; and•adjusted earnings available to common shareholders on a constant currency basis. These measures are used by management to evaluate performance and allocate resources. Consistent with GAAP guidance for segment reporting, adjusted earnings and components of, or other financial measures based on, adjusted earnings are also our GAAP measures of segment performance. Adjusted earnings and other financial measures based on adjusted earnings are also the measures by which senior management’s and many other employees’ performance is evaluated for the purposes of determining their compensation under applicable compensation plans. Adjusted earnings and other financial measures based on adjusted earnings allow analysis of our performance relative to our business plan and facilitate comparisons to industry results. The adoption of LDTI impacted the Company’s calculation of adjusted earnings. With the adoption of LDTI, the measurement model was simplified for DAC and VOBA, and most embedded derivatives were reclassified as MRBs. As a result, the Company updated its calculation of adjusted earnings to remove certain adjustments related to the amortization of DAC, VOBA and related intangibles and adjusted for changes in measurement of certain guarantees. Under LDTI, adjusted earnings excludes changes in fair value associated with MRBs, changes in discount rates on certain annuitization guarantees, losses at contract inception for certain single premium business, and asymmetrical accounting associated with in-force reinsurance. All periods presented herein reflect the updated calculation of adjusted earnings.Adjusted earnings is defined as adjusted revenues less adjusted expenses, net of income tax. Adjusted loss is defined as negative adjusted earnings. Adjusted earnings available to common shareholders is defined as adjusted earnings less preferred stock dividends. For information relating to adjusted revenues and adjusted expenses, see “Financial Measures and Segment Accounting Policies” in Note 2 of the Notes to the Interim Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.In addition, adjusted earnings available to common shareholders excludes the impact of preferred stock redemption premium, which is reported as a reduction to net income (loss) available to MetLife, Inc.’s common shareholders.
•Total MetLife, Inc.’s common stockholders’ equity, excluding accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) other than foreign currency translation adjustments (“FCTA”), is defined as total MetLife, Inc.’s common stockholders’ equity, excluding the net unrealized investment gains (losses), future policy benefits discount rate remeasurement gains (losses), MRBs instrument-specific credit risk remeasurement gains (losses) and defined benefit plans adjustment components of AOCI, net of income tax.•Return on MetLife, Inc.’s common stockholders’ equity: net income (loss) available to MetLife, Inc.’s common shareholders divided by MetLife, Inc.’s average common stockholders’ equity.•Adjusted return on MetLife, Inc.’s common stockholders’ equity is defined as adjusted earnings available to common shareholders divided by MetLife, Inc.’s average common stockholders’ equity.•Adjusted return on MetLife, Inc.’s common stockholders’ equity, excluding AOCI other than FCTA, is defined as adjusted earnings available to common shareholders divided by MetLife, Inc.’s average common stockholders’ equity, excluding AOCI other than FCTA.•Allocated equity is the portion of MetLife, Inc.’s common stockholders’ equity that management allocates to each of its segments and sub-segments based on local capital requirements and economic capital. See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Risk Management — Economic Capital” in the 2022 Annual Report. Allocated equity excludes the impact of AOCI other than FCTA.  The above measures represent a level of equity consistent with the view that, in the ordinary course of business, we do not plan to sell most investments for the sole purpose of realizing gains or losses.
•Expense ratio: other expenses, net of capitalization of DAC, divided by premiums, fees and other revenues.•Direct expense ratio: adjusted direct expenses divided by adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues. Direct expenses are comprised of employee-related costs, third party staffing costs, and general and administrative expenses.•Direct expense ratio, excluding total notable items related to direct expenses and pension risk transfers: adjusted direct expenses excluding total notable items related to direct expenses, divided by adjusted premiums, fees and other revenues, excluding pension risk transfers.
•We sometimes refer to sales activity for various products. These sales statistics do not correspond to revenues under GAAP, but are used as relevant measures of business activity. Further, sales statistics for our Latin America, Asia and EMEA segments are on a constant currency basis.•Near-term represents one to three years.•Notable items reflect the unexpected impact of events that affect the Company’s results, but that were unknown and that the Company could not anticipate when it devised its business plan. Notable items also include certain items regardless of the extent anticipated in the business plan, to help investors have a better understanding of MetLife’s results and to evaluate and forecast those results. Notable items represent a positive (negative) impact to adjusted earnings available to common shareholders. •The Company uses a measure of free cash flow to facilitate an understanding of its ability to generate cash for reinvestment into its businesses or use in non-mandatory capital actions. The Company defines free cash flow as the sum of cash available at MetLife’s holding companies from dividends from operating subsidiaries, expenses and other net flows of the holding companies (including capital contributions to subsidiaries), and net contributions from debt to be at or below target leverage ratios. This measure of free cash flow is prior to capital actions, such as common stock dividends and repurchases, debt reduction and mergers and acquisitions. Free cash flow should not be viewed as a substitute for net cash provided by (used in) operating activities calculated in accordance with GAAP. The free cash flow ratio is typically expressed as a percentage of annual adjusted earnings available to common shareholders.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations — Risk Management” in the 2022 Annual Report for information on our risk management.