
During the past three decades, the Company has grown significantly. Its current geographic breadth and diverse product offering are reflected in three reporting segments: Global Ceramic, Flooring North America (“Flooring NA”) and Flooring Rest of the World (“Flooring ROW”). Global Ceramic designs, manufactures, sources and markets a broad line of ceramic tile, porcelain tile, natural stone tile and other products including natural stone, porcelain slabs and quartz countertops, which it distributes primarily in North America, Europe, Brazil and Russia through various selling channels, which include company-owned stores, independent distributors and home centers. Flooring NA designs, manufactures, sources and markets its floor covering products, including broadloom carpet, carpet tile, carpet cushion, rugs, laminate, vinyl products, including luxury vinyl tile (“LVT”) and sheet vinyl, and wood flooring, all of which it distributes through its network of regional distribution centers and satellite warehouses using Company-operated trucks, common carriers or rail transportation. The Segment’s product lines are sold through various channels, including independent floor covering retailers, independent distributors, home centers, mass merchandisers, department stores, shop at home, online retailers, buying groups, commercial contractors and commercial end users. Flooring ROW designs, manufactures, sources, licenses and markets laminate, vinyl products, including LVT and sheet vinyl, wood flooring, roofing panels, insulation boards, medium-density fiberboard (“MDF”) and chipboards, which it distributes primarily in Europe, Russia, Australia and New Zealand through various channels, including independent floor covering retailers, independent distributors, company-owned distributors, home centers, commercial contractors and commercial end users.Mohawk is a significant supplier of every major flooring category with manufacturing operations in 19 nations and sales in approximately 170 countries. Based on its annual sales, the Company believes it is the world’s largest flooring manufacturer. A majority of the Company’s long-lived assets are located in the United States and Europe, which are also the Company’s primary markets. Additionally, the Company maintains operations in Australia, Brazil, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Russia and other parts of the world. The Company is a leading provider of flooring for residential and commercial markets and has earned significant recognition for its innovation in design and performance as well as sustainability.  Due to its global footprint, Mohawk’s business is sensitive to macroeconomic events in the United States and abroad, including the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. While the near-term economic and financial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is unpredictable, the Company may continue to see fluctuating demand across a number of its markets.  In addition, as a result of Russian military actions in Ukraine, the Company experienced supply chain disruption of raw materials sourced from Ukraine (primarily clay), as well as other materials and spare parts needed in the Company’s operations. The Company was also impacted by global increases in the cost of natural gas, oil and oil-based raw materials and chemicals that were among the broader consequences of Russia’s actions.  In addition, the United States, the European Union and other governments have imposed and extended sanctions on Russia as well as on certain individuals and financial institutions and have proposed the use of broader economic sanctions. Russia also imposed reciprocal sanctions against the United States and the European Union. Since the first quarter 2022, the Company has suspended new investments in Russia. The broader consequences of this conflict, which may include further economic sanctions, embargoes, regional instability, and geopolitical shifts; potential retaliatory actions, including nationalization of foreign-owned businesses; increased tensions between the United States and countries in which the Company operates; and the extent of the conflict’s effect on the Company’s business and results of operations, as well as the global economy, cannot be predicted.During 2022, rapid cost escalations in materials, energy, transportation and labor impacted the Company’s profitability across all segments, and high inflation and rising interest rates affected new home construction and residential remodeling in most of the Company’s markets. As consumers faced a higher cost of living, discretionary spending – including flooring purchases – declined; and, as a result, the Company’s customers reduced inventories, which continued into the first quarter of 2023. Despite multiple pricing actions, improved product mix; productivity gains and cost containment measures, the Company did not completely offset inflation in the first quarter. Recently, material and energy prices have declined, which will benefit the Company’s future results as the costs flow through the statement of operations. To further address energy price volatility, the Company has invested in renewable energy initiatives, which provide lower cost power to our facilities. During the first quarter, energy from the Company’s biomass plants lowered its cost and benefited its results. During 2022, the Company took actions to enhance future performance including facility and product rationalizations, restructuring initiatives and workforce reductions. The Company has continued to reduce costs across the enterprise by enhancing productivity, streamlining processes, controlling administrative expenses and executing restructuring actions. The Company anticipates these global actions will deliver annual savings of approximately $60 to $65 million, with an estimated cost of approximately $135 to $140 million. The Company believes it is well positioned with a strong balance sheet and limited debt. Based on its current liquidity and available credit, the Company is in a position to finance internal investments, acquisitions and/or additional stock purchases. For information on risks that could impact the Company’s results, please refer to Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A in the Company’s 2022 Annual Report filed on Form 10-K. During the first quarter of 2023, the Company acquired two ceramic tile businesses in Brazil and Mexico. During 2022, the Company completed five small, bolt-on acquisitions: a wood veneer plant in Romania; a sheet vinyl producer in Poland; a mezzanine flooring manufacturer in Germany; a nonwoven carpet and rug producer in the U.S.; and a commercial flooring trim and accessories business in the U.S. In 2023, the Company plans to invest  approximately $570 million to complete existing projects and commence new initiatives. The Company plans to invest in cost reduction initiatives, upgrades in recent acquisitions, previously initiated expansion projects and general maintenance across the business. The primary investment areas include the Company’s LVT portfolio to upgrade its product offering and improve profitability; premium waterproof laminate in North America and Europe; and quartz countertop and porcelain slab expansion in North America and Europe, respectively.For the three months ended April 1, 2023, net earnings attributable to the Company were $80.2 million compared to net earnings attributable to the Company of $245.3 million for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The change in net earnings was primarily attributable to higher inflation; lower sales volume; unfavorable impact of temporary plant shutdowns; higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related, and other costs; higher costs associated with investments in new product development and marketing costs and higher interest expense. The unfavorable impact of the aforementioned items was partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix, productivity gains and lower taxes due to decreased earnings in 2023 compared to the prior year. The Company believes that a number of  circumstances may impact trends in 2023, including the impact of inflation and material availability due to disruptions in the global supply chain, but the extent and duration of such impact cannot be predicted.For the three months ended April 1, 2023, the Company generated $257.3 million of cash from operating activities. As of April 1, 2023, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $572.9 million, of which $383.2 million was in the United States and $189.6 million was in foreign countries.
Net sales for the three months ended April 1, 2023 were $2,806.2 million, reflecting a decrease of $209.5 million, or 6.9%, from $3,015.7 million reported for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease was primarily attributable to  lower sales volume of approximately $335 million, including the impact of acquisitions, and the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $31 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $160 million. Global Ceramic—Net sales for the three months ended April 1, 2023 were $1,059.3 million, reflecting a decrease of $5.5 million, or 0.5%, from $1,064.8 million reported for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower sales volume of approximately $97 million, including the impact of acquisitions, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $86 million and the favorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $6 million.Flooring NA—Net sales for the three months ended April 1, 2023 were $953.4 million, reflecting a decrease of $118.5 million, or 11.1%, from $1,071.9 million reported for the three months ended April 1, 2023. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower sales volume of approximately $117 million, including the impact of acquisitions, and the unfavorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $2 million.Flooring ROW—Net sales for the three months ended April 1, 2023 were $793.5 million, reflecting a decrease of $85.5 million, or 9.7%, from $879.0 million for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower sales volume of approximately $121 million and the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $37 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $76 million.
Gross profit for the three months ended April 1, 2023 was $643.4 million (22.9% of net sales), a decrease of $158.7 million, or 19.8%, compared to gross profit of $802.1 million (26.6% of net sales) for the three months ended April 2, 2022. As a percentage of net sales, gross profit decreased 370 basis points. The decrease in gross profit dollars was primarily attributable to higher inflation of approximately $141 million, lower sales volume of approximately $115 million, the unfavorable impact of temporary plant shutdowns of approximately $42 million, higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related, and other costs of approximately $31 million and the unfavorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $3 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $149 million and productivity gains of approximately $18 million.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the three months ended April 1, 2023 were $517.7 million (18.4% of net sales), an increase of $36.4 million compared to $481.3 million (16.0% of net sales) for the three months ended April 2, 2022. As a percentage of net sales, selling, general and administrative expenses increased 240 basis points. The increase in selling, general and administrative expenses in dollars was primarily attributable to higher inflation of approximately $17 million, higher costs associated with investments in new product development and marketing costs of approximately $16 million, higher sales volume of approximately $5 million, higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related, and other costs of approximately $3 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact from foreign exchange rates of approximately $4 million and productivity gains of approximately $4 million.
Operating income for the three months ended April 1, 2023 was $125.8 million (4.5% of net sales), reflecting a decrease of $195.0 million, or 60.8%, compared to operating income of $320.8 million (10.6% of net sales) for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to higher inflation of approximately $158 million, lower sales volume of approximately $120 million, the unfavorable impact of temporary plant shutdowns of approximately $42 million, higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related, and other costs of approximately $35 million and higher costs associated with investments in new product development and marketing costs of approximately $16 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $146 million and productivity gains of approximately $21 million.Global Ceramic—Operating income was $63.3 million (6.0% of segment net sales) for the three months ended April 1, 2023, reflecting a decrease of $37.0 million compared to operating income of $100.3 million (9.4% of segment net sales) for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to higher inflation of approximately $51 million, lower sales volume of approximately $47 million and the unfavorable impact of temporary plant shutdowns of approximately $11 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $58 million and productivity gains of approximately $13 million.Flooring NA—Operating loss was $2.0 million ((0.2)% of segment net sales) for the three months ended April 1, 2023, reflecting a decrease of $97.3 million compared to operating income of $95.3 million (8.9% of segment net sales) for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to higher inflation of approximately $51 million, lower sales volume of approximately $31 million, the unfavorable impact of temporary plant shutdowns of approximately $17 million, higher costs associated with investments in new product development and marketing costs of approximately $15 million and higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related, and other costs of approximately $7 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $15 million and productivity gains of approximately $8 million.Flooring ROW—Operating income was $75.2 million (9.5% of segment net sales) for the three months ended April 1, 2023, reflecting a decrease of $59.5 million compared to operating income of $134.7 million (15.3% of segment net sales) for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The decrease in operating income was primarily attributable to higher inflation of approximately $56 million, lower sales volume of approximately $41 million, higher restructuring, acquisition and integration-related, and other costs of approximately $23 million and the unfavorable impact of temporary plant shutdowns of approximately $13 million, partially offset by the favorable net impact of price and product mix of approximately $72 million.
Interest expense was $17.1 million for the three months ended April 1, 2023, reflecting an increase of $5.6 million compared to interest expense of $11.5 million for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The increase in interest expense was primarily due to a significant increase in interest rates, as well as acquisitions made in 2022 and first quarter of 2023.
Other income, net was $0.6 million for the three months ended April 1, 2023, reflecting a favorable change of $3.0 million compared to other expense, net of $2.4 million for the three months ended April 2, 2022. The change was primarily attributable to the reversal of uncertain tax position recorded with the Emil acquisition of approximately $7 million during the three months ended April 2, 2022, partially offset by the unfavorable net impact of foreign exchange rates of approximately $4 million.
For the three months ended April 1, 2023, the Company recorded income tax expense of $28.9 million on earnings before income taxes of $109.2 million, for an effective tax rate of 26.5%. For the three months ended April 2, 2022, the Company recorded income tax expense of $61.4 million on earnings before income taxes of $306.9 million, for an effective tax rate of 20.0%. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by the Company’s geographic dispersion of profits and losses for the respective periods, the write-off of an income tax receivable no longer expected in the  three months ended April 1, 2023 and an Italian benefit associated with the release of an uncertain tax liability in the three months ended April 2, 2022, partially offset by lower earnings before income taxes.
The Company’s primary capital requirements are for working capital, capital expenditures and acquisitions. The Company’s capital needs are met primarily through a combination of internally generated funds, commercial paper, bank credit lines, term and senior notes and credit terms from suppliers. Net cash provided by operating activities in the first three months of 2023 was $257.3 million, compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $55.0 million in the first three months of 2022. The increase of $202.3 million in 2023 was primarily attributable to the change in accounts receivable and inventory, partially offset by change in accounts payable and lower net earnings.Net cash used in investing activities in the first three months of 2023 was $639.9 million compared to net cash used in investing activities of $115.5 million in the first three months of 2022. The increase was primarily due to the increase in  acquisition costs of $520 million.Net cash provided by financing activities in the first three months of 2023 was $451.0 million compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $9.0 million in the first three months of 2022. The change in cash provided by financing activities is primarily attributable to the higher net proceeds from the Senior Credit facility of $357.4 million and lower share repurchase of $306.6 million, partially offset by lower net proceeds from commercial paper of $209.6 million.  As of April 1, 2023, the Company had cash of $572.9 million, of which $189.6 million was held outside the United States. The Company plans to permanently reinvest the cash held outside the United States. The Company believes that its cash and cash equivalents on hand, cash generated from operations and availability under its existing credit facilities will be sufficient to meet its capital expenditure, working capital and debt servicing requirements over at least the next twelve months. The Company continually evaluates its projected needs and may conduct additional debt financings, subject to market conditions, to increase its liquidity and to take advantage of attractive financing opportunities. On February 10, 2022, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a new share repurchase program, authorizing the Company to repurchase up to $500 million of its common stock (the “2022 Share Repurchase Program”). As of April 1, 2023, there remained $229.2 million authorized under the 2022 Share Repurchase Program.See Note 18, Debt, of the notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for further discussion of the Company’s long-term debt. The Company may continue, from time to time, to retire its outstanding debt through cash purchases in the open market, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise. Such repurchases, if any, will depend on prevailing market conditions, the Company’s liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors. The amount involved may be material.
There have been no significant changes to the Company’s contractual obligations as disclosed in the Company’s 2022 Annual Report filed on Form 10-K except as described herein.