
In this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) section, we refer to the following “adjusted” financial measures: adjusted operating companies income (loss) (“OCI”); adjusted OCI margins; adjusted net earnings; adjusted diluted earnings per share; and adjusted effective tax rates.  These adjusted financial measures are not required by, or calculated in accordance with, United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and may not be calculated the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies.  These adjusted financial measures should thus be considered as supplemental in nature and not considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP.  For a further description of these non-GAAP financial measures, see the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section below.
We have a leading portfolio of tobacco products for U.S. tobacco consumers age 21+.  Our Vision is to responsibly lead the transition of adult smokers to a smoke-free future (“Vision”).  We are Moving Beyond Smoking™, leading the way in moving adult smokers away from cigarettes by taking action to transition millions to potentially less harmful choices - believing it is a substantial opportunity for adult tobacco consumers, our businesses and society.Our wholly owned subsidiaries include leading manufacturers of both combustible and smoke-free products.  In combustibles, we own Philip Morris USA Inc. (“PM USA”), the most profitable U.S. cigarette manufacturer, and John Middleton Co. (“Middleton”), a leading U.S. cigar manufacturer.Our smoke-free portfolio includes ownership of U.S. Smokeless Tobacco Company LLC (“USSTC”), the leading global moist smokeless tobacco (“MST”) manufacturer, and Helix Innovations LLC (“Helix”), a leading manufacturer of oral nicotine pouches.  Additionally, we have a majority-owned joint venture, Horizon Innovations LLC (“Horizon”), for the U.S. marketing and commercialization of heated tobacco stick products and, through a separate agreement, we have the exclusive U.S. commercialization rights to the IQOS Tobacco Heating System (“IQOS System”) and Marlboro HeatSticks through April 2024.  As of this filing, there are no products in the U.S. marketplace from the joint venture or exclusive rights agreement.On March 3, 2023, we entered into a stock transfer agreement with JUUL Labs, Inc. (“JUUL”) pursuant to which we transferred to JUUL all of our beneficially owned JUUL equity securities.  In exchange, we received a non-exclusive, irrevocable global license to certain of JUUL’s heated tobacco intellectual property.Our investments in equity securities include Anheuser-Busch InBev SA/NV (“ABI”), the world’s largest brewer, and Cronos Group Inc. (“Cronos”), a leading Canadian cannabinoid company.On March 3, 2023, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire NJOY Holdings, Inc. (“NJOY”), a U.S. based e-vapor company, for approximately $2.75 billion in cash payable at closing plus up to an additional $500 million in cash payments that are contingent upon regulatory outcomes with respect to certain NJOY products (“NJOY Transaction”).  Following completion of the NJOY Transaction, NJOY will survive as a wholly owned subsidiary of Altria, and we will gain full global ownership of NJOY’s e-vapor product portfolio, including NJOY ACE, currently the only pod-based e-vapor product with market authorizations from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).  The completion of the NJOY Transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including clearance from the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (“FTC”), and is not subject to any financing condition.  The parties have filed for premerger clearance with the FTC under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended (“HSR Act”), which remains under FTC review.  The current waiting period under the HSR Act expires in May 2023.The brand portfolios of our tobacco operating companies include Marlboro, Black & Mild, Copenhagen, Skoal and on!.  Trademarks and service marks related to Altria referenced in this Form 10-Q are the property of Altria or our subsidiaries or are used with permission.
In this MD&A section, we discuss factors that have impacted our business as of the date of this Form 10-Q.  In addition, we are aware of certain trends and developments that could, individually or in the aggregate, have a material impact on our business, including the value of our investments in equity securities, in the future.  In this Trends and Developments section, we focus on the continued elevated rate of inflation, supply chain disruptions, ongoing geopolitical events and recent regulatory actions and their potential effects on our business, including impacts on adult tobacco consumers and their purchasing behaviors.We continue to monitor the evolving macroeconomic and geopolitical landscapes.  While the most recent inflation report from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics showed a lower rate of increase, high rates of inflation have continued in 2023, driven by increased global energy, commodity and food prices, which were further exacerbated by other factors, including supply and demand imbalances, labor shortages and the Russian invasion of Ukraine.  High inflation, high gas prices and rising interest rates could continue to impact our business by negatively impacting adult tobacco consumers’ disposable income and future purchase behaviors.  During the first quarter of 2023, cigarette retail share for the industry discount segment increased.  We continue to expect potential fluctuations in discount product share for cigarettes and MST products as price sensitive adult tobacco consumers react to their economic conditions.  We will continue to monitor the effect of these dynamics on adult tobacco consumers and their purchase behaviors, including overall tobacco product expenditures, mix between premium and discount brand purchases and adoption of smoke-free products.  Increases in inflation also have a direct and adverse impact on our Master Settlement Agreement (“MSA”) expense and other direct and indirect costs.  We expect inflation to remain high in 2023, and the extent of any effects on adult tobacco consumers’ purchase behaviors depends in part on the magnitude and duration of such increased inflation levels.We expect volatility in domestic and global economies and disruptions in the supply and distribution chains to continue in 2023, resulting from several factors, including the on-going impacts of inflation, supply and demand imbalances across many sectors such as energy and commodities, raw materials availability and geopolitical events.  We continue to work to mitigate the potential negative impacts of these macroeconomic and geopolitical dynamics on our businesses through, among other actions, proactive engagement with current and potential suppliers and distributors, the development of alternative sourcing strategies, entry into long-term supply contracts and prudent oversight of our liquidity.Tobacco companies are subject to broad and evolving regulatory and legislative frameworks that could have a material impact on our business.  For example, the FDA has issued proposed product standards regarding menthol in cigarettes and characterizing flavors in cigars, and the Biden Administration published plans for future potential regulatory actions that include the FDA’s plans to develop a proposed product standard that would establish a maximum nicotine level for cigarettes and certain other combustible tobacco products.  In California, where a ban on flavored nicotine products went into effect in late 2022, we are observing early indications of unintended consequences, such as adult tobacco consumer adoption of adulterated and unregulated products and the development of illicit markets.See Operating Results by Business Segment - Tobacco Space - Business Environment for additional information on the trends and developments discussed above.We expect adverse macroeconomic and geopolitical landscapes, which have impacted global businesses, including ABI, to continue in 2023.  ABI’s business has continued to be impacted by foreign exchange rate fluctuations, inflation and commodity cost headwinds.  Additionally, the macroeconomic and geopolitical factors have contributed to significant changes in certain foreign exchange rates, including the Euro to U.S. dollar exchange rate, and in the global equity markets.  We will continue to monitor these conditions as they could affect our equity earnings that we receive from ABI and the fair value of our equity investment in ABI.See Note 3. Investments in Equity Securities to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Part I, Item 1. Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q (“Item 1”) for additional information on our investments in equity securities.Our operating companies have not experienced any material adverse effects from the trends and developments discussed above.  Additionally, we do not believe that these trends and developments have impacted our ability to achieve our Vision.  As the trends and developments discussed above evolve and new ones emerge, we will continue to evaluate the potential impacts on our business, investments and Vision.
The changes in net earnings and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) for the three months ended March 31, 2023, from the three months ended March 31, 2022, were due primarily to the following:
▪Fewer Shares Outstanding: Fewer shares outstanding were due to shares we repurchased under our $3.5 billion share repurchase program, which was completed in 2022.▪Operations: The increase of $67 million in operations (which excludes the impact of special items shown in the table above) was due primarily to higher income from our equity investment in ABI and lower interest and other debt expense, net.
We expect our 2023 full-year adjusted diluted EPS to be in a range of $4.98 to $5.13, representing a growth rate of 3% to 6% over our 2022 full-year adjusted diluted EPS base of $4.84, as shown in the first table below.  While the 2023 full-year adjusted diluted EPS guidance accounts for a range of scenarios, the external environment remains dynamic.  We will continue to monitor conditions related to (i) the economy, including the impact of high inflation, rising interest rates and global supply chain disruptions, (ii) adult tobacco consumer dynamics, including disposable income, purchasing patterns and adoption of smoke-free products and (iii) regulatory and legislative developments.Our 2023 full-year adjusted diluted EPS guidance range includes planned investments in support of our Vision, such as (i) continued smoke-free product research, development and regulatory preparation expenses, (ii) enhancement of our digital consumer engagement system and (iii) marketplace activities in support of our smoke-free products.  This guidance range also includes lower expected net periodic benefit income due to market factors, including higher interest rates, and the impact of the 2022 completion of the wind-down of our former financial services business.  This guidance range does not include the potential financial impacts of the NJOY Transaction.
The following (income) expense items are excluded from our 2023 forecasted adjusted diluted EPS growth rate:
Our full-year adjusted diluted EPS forecast excludes the impact of certain income and expense items, including those items noted in the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section below, that our management believes are not part of underlying operations.  Other than as set forth in the table immediately above, our management cannot estimate on a forward-looking basis the impact of these items on our reported diluted EPS because these items, which could be significant, may be unusual or infrequent, are difficult to predict and may be highly variable.  As a result, we do not provide a corresponding GAAP measure for, or reconciliation to, our adjusted diluted EPS forecast.
While we report our financial results in accordance with GAAP, our management reviews OCI, which is defined as operating income before general corporate expenses and amortization of intangibles, to evaluate the performance of, and allocate resources to, our segments.  Our management also reviews certain financial results, including OCI, OCI margins, net earnings and diluted EPS, on an adjusted basis, which excludes certain income and expense items that our management believes are not part of underlying operations.  These items may include, for example, loss on early extinguishment of debt, restructuring charges, asset impairment charges, acquisition-related and disposition-related items, equity investment-related special items (including any changes in fair value of our equity investment recorded at fair value and any changes in the fair value of related warrants and preemptive rights), certain income tax items, charges associated with tobacco and health and certain other litigation items, and resolutions of certain non-participating manufacturer (“NPM”) adjustment disputes under the MSA (such dispute resolutions are referred to as “NPM Adjustment Items”).  Our management does not view any of these special items to be part of our underlying results as they may be highly variable, may be unusual or infrequent, are difficult to predict and can distort underlying business trends and results.  Our management also reviews income tax rates on an adjusted basis.  Our adjusted effective tax rate may exclude certain income tax items from our reported effective tax rate.Our management believes that adjusted financial measures provide useful additional insight into underlying business trends and results, and provide a more meaningful comparison of year-over-year results.  Our management uses adjusted financial measures and regularly provides these to our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) for planning, forecasting and evaluating business and financial performance, including allocating resources and evaluating results relative to employee compensation targets.  These adjusted financial measures are not required by, or calculated in accordance with GAAP and may not be calculated the same as similarly titled measures used by other companies.  These adjusted financial measures should thus be considered as supplemental in nature and not considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP.  Except as noted in the 2023 Forecasted Results section above, when we provide a non-GAAP measure in this Form 10-Q, we also provide a reconciliation of that non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
As discussed further in Note 8. Segment Reporting to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1 (“Note 8”), our CODM reviews OCI to evaluate the performance of, and allocate resources to, our segments.  Our management believes it is appropriate to disclose this measure to help investors analyze the business performance and trends of our business segments.The following table provides a reconciliation of adjusted net earnings and adjusted diluted EPS for the three months ended March 31:
The following special items affected the comparability of statements of earnings amounts for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:▪NPM Adjustment Items: For a discussion of NPM Adjustment Items and a breakdown of these items by segment, see Health Care Cost Recovery Litigation in Note 11. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1 (“Note 11”) and NPM Adjustment Items in Note 8, respectively.▪Tobacco and Health and Certain Other Litigation Items: For a discussion of tobacco and health and certain other litigation items and a breakdown of these costs by segment, see Note 11 and Tobacco and Health and Certain Other Litigation Items in Note 8, respectively.▪Loss on Disposition and Changes in Fair Value of JUUL Equity Securities: We recorded a non-cash, pre-tax loss of $250 million related to the disposition of our JUUL equity securities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as (income) losses from investments in equity securities in our condensed consolidated statement of earnings.We recorded a non-cash, pre-tax unrealized loss of $100 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022 as (income) losses from investments in equity securities in our condensed consolidated statement of earnings as a result of a decrease in the estimated fair value of our investment in JUUL.We recorded corresponding adjustments to the JUUL tax valuation allowance in 2023 and 2022.For further discussion, see Note 3. Investments in Equity Securities to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1 (“Note 3”) and Note 10. Income Taxes to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1 (“Note 10”).▪ABI-Related Special Items: We recorded net pre-tax income of $59 million from our equity investment in ABI for the three months ended March 31, 2022, consisting primarily of mark-to-market gains on certain ABI financial instruments associated with its share commitments.  For further discussion, see Note 3.The ABI-related special items include our respective share of the amounts recorded by ABI and additional adjustments related to (i) conversion from international financial reporting standards to GAAP and (ii) adjustments to our investment required under the equity method of accounting.▪Cronos-Related Special Items: We recorded net pre-tax expense consisting of the following:
(1) Amounts include our share of special items recorded by Cronos and additional adjustments, if required under the equity method of accounting, related to our investment in Cronos.We recorded corresponding adjustments to the Cronos tax valuation allowance in 2023 and 2022 relating to the special items.For further discussion, see Note 3 and Note 10.
Net revenues, which include excise taxes billed to customers, decreased $173 million (2.9%), substantially all of which was due to lower net revenues in the smokeable products segment.Cost of sales was essentially unchanged, as lower shipment volume in our smokeable products segment was mostly offset by higher per unit settlement charges and NPM Adjustment Items in 2022.Excise taxes on products decreased $117 million (10.9%), due to lower shipment volume in our smokeable products segment.Marketing, administration and research costs increased $83 million (17.0%), due primarily to higher general corporate expenses (including an agreement to resolve shareholder derivative lawsuits in 2023 as discussed in Note 11).Operating income decreased $127 million (4.4%), due primarily to higher general corporate expenses and lower operating results in our smokeable products segment.Interest and other debt expense, net decreased $52 million (18.5%), due primarily to higher interest income due to higher rates and 2023 interest income associated with the sale of the IQOS System commercialization rights.(Income) losses from investments in equity securities decreased $114 million (100%+), due primarily to the loss on the disposition of our JUUL equity securities, partially offset by 2022 changes in the estimated fair value of our former investment in JUUL equity securities and lower losses from our Cronos-related special items.Reported net earnings of $1,787 million decreased $172 million (8.8%), due primarily to lower operating income and unfavorable results from our investments in equity securities, partially offset by lower interest and other debt expense, net.  Reported basic and diluted EPS of $1.00, each decreased by 7.4% due to lower reported net earnings, partially offset by fewer shares outstanding.Adjusted net earnings of $2,118 million increased $71 million (3.5%) due primarily to higher income from our equity investment in ABI and lower interest and other debt expense, net.  Adjusted diluted EPS of $1.18 increased by 5.4%, due to higher adjusted net earnings and fewer shares outstanding.
The U.S. tobacco industry faces a number of business and legal challenges that have materially adversely affected and may continue to materially adversely affect our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position or our ability to achieve our Vision.  These challenges, some of which are discussed in more detail in Note 11 and in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 (“2022 Form 10-K”) and in Part II, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-Q, include:▪pending and threatened litigation and bonding requirements;▪restrictions and requirements imposed by the FSPTCA, and restrictions and requirements (and related enforcement actions) that have been, and in the future will be, imposed by the FDA;▪actual and proposed excise tax increases, as well as changes in tax structures and tax stamping requirements;▪bans and restrictions on tobacco use imposed by governmental entities and private establishments and employers;▪other federal, state and local government actions, including:▪restrictions on the sale of certain tobacco products, the sale of tobacco products by certain retail establishments, the sale of tobacco products with characterizing flavors and the sale of tobacco products in certain package sizes;▪additional restrictions on the advertising and promotion of tobacco products;▪other actual and proposed tobacco-related legislation and regulation; and▪governmental investigations;▪reductions in consumption levels of cigarettes and MST products;▪increased efforts by tobacco control advocates and other private sector entities (including retail establishments) to further restrict the availability and use of tobacco products or the ability to communicate with consumers through third-party digital platforms;▪changes in adult tobacco consumer purchase behavior, which is influenced by various factors such as macroeconomic conditions (including inflation), excise taxes and price gap relationships, may result in adult tobacco consumers switching to lower-priced tobacco products;▪the highly competitive nature of all tobacco categories, including competitive disadvantages related to cigarette price increases attributable to the settlement of certain litigation and the proliferation of innovative tobacco products, such as e-vapor and oral nicotine pouch products;▪illicit trade in tobacco products; and▪potential adverse changes in prices, availability and quality of tobacco, other raw materials and component parts, including as a result of changes in macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions.In addition to and in connection with the foregoing, evolving adult tobacco consumer preferences continue to impact the tobacco industry.  We believe that a significant number of adult tobacco consumers switch among tobacco categories, use multiple forms of tobacco products and try innovative tobacco products, such as e-vapor products and oral nicotine pouches.  Adult smokers continue to transition from cigarettes to exclusive use of smoke-free tobacco product alternatives, which aligns with our Vision.We work to meet these evolving adult tobacco consumer preferences over time by developing, manufacturing, marketing and distributing products both within and outside the United States through innovation and other growth strategies (including, where appropriate, arrangements with, or investments in, third parties).Over the past two years, the legislative and regulatory activities discussed below negatively impacted growth in the e-vapor category.  The total e-vapor category experienced an estimated volume decline of 11% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022, despite disposable e-vapor product volume growth.  In the first quarter of 2023, e-vapor industry volumes declined sequentially by 1%.  In March 2022, the U.S. Congress expanded the statutory definition of tobacco products to include products containing nicotine derived from any source, including synthetic nicotine.  The amendment became effective in April 2022.  Additionally, over the past year, the FDA has issued marketing denial orders (“MDOs”) for several vaping products.  The FDA has issued stays temporarily suspending the MDOs for further review of these products, allowing them to remain in market.  In addition, legislation recently became effective in California that bans the sale of most tobacco products with characterizing flavors.  We believe these activities, which may be subject to legal challenges, will further impact the competitive environment and e-vapor category landscape.  We are monitoring the sale and distribution of synthetic nicotine products, including in the form of e-vapor products and oral nicotine pouches.Oral nicotine pouch retail share of the total oral tobacco category grew significantly from 19.1% year-to-date as of March 31, 2022 to 26.2% year-to-date as of March 31, 2023.  The oral nicotine pouch category continues to be increasingly competitive.  Oral nicotine pouch growth has sourced in significant part from smokeless tobacco and cigarette consumers.We believe the innovative tobacco product categories will continue to be dynamic due to competition, adult tobacco consumer exploration of a variety of tobacco product options, adult tobacco consumer perceptions of the relative risks of smoke-free products compared to cigarettes, FDA determinations on product applications, FDA enforcement activity and legislative actions.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we estimate that, when adjusted for trade inventory movements, calendar differences and other factors, domestic cigarette industry volume declined by 9%, compared to the three months ending March 31, 2022.  We expect 2023 cigarette industry volume trends to be most influenced by (i) disposable income, purchasing patterns and adoption of smoke-free products, (ii) macroeconomic conditions (including inflation, gasoline prices and unemployment levels), (iii) cross-category movement and (iv) regulatory and legislative (including excise tax) developments.Macroeconomic conditions (including a high inflationary environment) can impact adult tobacco consumer purchasing behavior.  For example, economic downturns have coincided with adult tobacco consumers modifying purchase behavior at retail, potentially reducing the amount of their regular brand purchases or selecting discount products and other lower priced tobacco brands.  The Consumer Price Index (“CPI”) increased 5.0% for the 12 months ended March 2023, a decrease in the rate of CPI growth from the 8.5% increase over the 12 months ended March 2022.  Throughout the first three months ending March 31, 2023, gas prices remained fairly stable at below $3.50 per gallon.  In addition, low unemployment and stable wage inflation continued for the three months ending March 31, 2023.  Despite lower overall inflation, stable gas prices and low unemployment, elevated prices on other monthly expenses (including food, electricity and rent) continued to apply pricing pressures at retail for adult consumers.  Furthermore, the federal funds rate continued to increase, reaching 4.8% in March 2023, up 4.6% versus the prior year.We believe that adult tobacco consumers adapted their purchasing patterns across a variety of goods and services to compensate for the pressures on disposable income.  As price sensitive adult tobacco consumers react to their economic conditions, we expect potential fluctuations in discount product share for cigarettes and MST products.  However, if macroeconomic conditions or other factors cause greater than expected discount share growth or a reduction in purchases at retail, such factors could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position, including an adverse effect on the carrying value of our assets such as our tobacco product trademarks.
▪The Regulatory Framework: The FSPTCA and its related regulations establish broad FDA regulatory authority over all tobacco products and, among other provisions:▪impose restrictions on the advertising, promotion, sale and distribution of tobacco products (see Final Tobacco Marketing Rule below);▪establish pre-market review pathways for new and modified tobacco products (see Pre-Market Review Pathways for Tobacco Products and Market Authorization Enforcement below);▪prohibit any express or implied claims that a tobacco product is or may be less harmful than other tobacco products without FDA authorization;▪authorize the FDA to impose tobacco product standards that are appropriate for the protection of the public health (see Potential Product Standards below); and▪equip the FDA with a variety of investigatory and enforcement tools, including the authority to inspect product manufacturing and other facilities (see Investigation and Enforcement below).The FSPTCA also bans descriptors such as “light,” “low” or “mild” when used as descriptors of modified risk, unless expressly authorized by the FDA.  In connection with a 2016 lawsuit initiated by Middleton, the U.S. Department of Justice, on behalf of the FDA, informed Middleton that the FDA does not intend to bring an enforcement action against Middleton for the use of the term “mild” in the trademark “Black & Mild.”  Consequently, Middleton dismissed its lawsuit without prejudice.  If the FDA were to change its position at some later date, Middleton would have the opportunity to bring another lawsuit.In March 2022, the U.S. Congress expanded the statutory definition of tobacco products to include products containing nicotine derived from any source, including synthetic nicotine.  The amendment became effective in April 2022.  See Pre-Market Review Pathways for Tobacco Products and Market Authorization Enforcement below for additional information on the effects of the statutory change.▪Final Tobacco Marketing Rule: As required by the FSPTCA, in March 2010, the FDA promulgated a wide range of advertising and promotion restrictions for cigarettes and smokeless tobacco(1) products (the “Final Tobacco Marketing Rule”).  The May 2016 deeming regulations amended the Final Tobacco Marketing Rule to expand specific provisions to all tobacco products, including cigars, pipe tobacco and e-vapor and oral nicotine products containing tobacco-derived nicotine or other tobacco derivatives.The Final Tobacco Marketing Rule, as amended, among other things:▪restricts the use of non-tobacco trade and brand names on cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products;▪prohibits sampling of all tobacco products except that sampling of smokeless tobacco products is permitted in qualified adult-only facilities;▪prohibits the sale or distribution of items such as hats and tee shirts with cigarette or smokeless tobacco brands or logos;▪prohibits cigarettes and smokeless tobacco brand name sponsorship of any athletic, musical, artistic or other social or cultural event, or any entry or team in any event; and
▪requires the development by the FDA of graphic warnings for cigarettes, establishes warning requirements for other tobacco products, and gives the FDA the authority to require new warnings for any type of tobacco product (see FDA Regulatory Actions - Graphic Warnings below).Subject to certain limitations arising from legal challenges, the Final Tobacco Marketing Rule took effect in June 2010 for cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products, in August 2016 for all other tobacco products, including e-vapor and oral nicotine pouch products containing tobacco-derived nicotine, and in April 2022 for tobacco products, including e-vapor and oral nicotine pouch products, that contain nicotine from any source other than tobacco, such as synthetic nicotine.▪Rulemaking and Guidance: From time to time, the FDA issues proposed regulations and guidance, which may be issued in draft or final form, generally involve public comment and may include scientific review.  The FDA also may request comments on broad topics through an Advanced Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (“ANPRM”).  We actively engage with the FDA to develop and implement the FSPTCA’s regulatory framework, including submission of comments to various FDA policies and proposals and participation in public hearings and engagement sessions.The FDA’s implementation of the FSPTCA and related regulations and guidance also may have an impact on enforcement efforts by states, territories and localities of their laws and regulations as well as of the State Settlement Agreements (see State Settlement Agreements below).  Such enforcement efforts may adversely affect our operating companies’ ability to market and sell regulated tobacco products in those states, territories and localities.▪FDA’s Comprehensive Plan for Tobacco and Nicotine Regulation: In July 2017, the FDA announced a “Comprehensive Plan for Tobacco and Nicotine Regulation” (“Comprehensive Plan”) designed to strike a balance between regulation and encouraging the development of innovative tobacco products that may be less risky than cigarettes.  Since then, the FDA has issued additional information about its Comprehensive Plan in response to concerns associated with the rise in the use of e-vapor products by youth and the potential youth appeal of flavored tobacco products (see FDA Regulatory Actions - Underage Access and Use of Certain Tobacco Products below).  As part of the Comprehensive Plan, the FDA:▪issued ANPRMs relating to potential product standards for nicotine in cigarettes, flavors in all tobacco products (including menthol in cigarettes and characterizing flavors in all cigars) and, for e-vapor products, to protect against known public health risks such as concerns about youth exposure to liquid nicotine;▪took actions to restrict youth access to e-vapor products; and▪reconsidered the processes used by the FDA to review certain reports and new product applications.In December 2022, the Reagan-Udall Foundation published a report on its operational evaluation of the FDA’s Center for Tobacco Products.  Among other recommendations, the report urges the FDA to clearly define product pathways, accelerate PMTA decision-making, take enforcement actions against manufacturers and products that violate the law and address the need for risk communications to tobacco consumers.  In February 2023, the FDA responded and committed to develop a five-year strategic plan by December 2023 designed to address concerns raised by the report.▪Pre-Market Review Pathways for Tobacco Products and Market Authorization Enforcement: The FSPTCA permits the sale of tobacco products on the market as of February 15, 2007 and not subsequently modified (“Pre-existing Tobacco Products”) and new or modified products authorized through the PMTA, Substantial Equivalence (“SE”) or SE Exemption pathways.  Subsequent FDA rules also provide a Supplemental PMTA pathway designed to increase the efficiency of submission and review for modified versions of previously authorized products.The FDA pre-market authorization enforcement policy varies based on product type and date of availability in the market, specifically:▪Pre-existing Tobacco Products are exempt from the pre-market authorization requirement;▪cigarette and smokeless tobacco products that were modified or first introduced into the market between February 15, 2007 and March 22, 2011 are generally considered “Provisional Products” for which SE reports were required to be filed by March 22, 2011.  These reports must demonstrate that the product has the same characteristics as a product on the market as of February 15, 2007 or to a product previously determined to be substantially equivalent, or has different characteristics but does not raise different questions of public health; ▪tobacco products that were first regulated by the FDA in 2016, including cigars, e-vapor products and oral nicotine pouches that are not Pre-existing Tobacco Products, are generally products for which either an SE report or PMTA needed to be filed by September 9, 2020; and▪tobacco products containing nicotine from any source other than tobacco (e.g., synthetic nicotine) that were on the market between March 15, 2022 and April 14, 2022 and are not Pre-existing Tobacco Products are generally products for which a manufacturer must have filed a PMTA by May 14, 2022.  A manufacturer was permitted to keep such a product on the market until July 13, 2022 provided that a PMTA was filed by May 14, 2022.  Thereafter, unless the FDA granted the product a marketing order, the product is unlawful and subject to possible FDA enforcement.Modifications to currently marketed products, including modifications that result from, for example, changes to the quantity of tobacco product(s) in a package, a manufacturer being unable to acquire ingredients or a supplier being unable to maintain the consistency required in ingredients, could trigger the FDA’s pre-market review processes.  Through these processes, a manufacturer could receive (i) a “not substantially equivalent” determination or (ii) a denial of a PMTA.  In addition, new scientific data continues to be developed relating to innovative tobacco products, which could impact the FDA’s determination as to whether a product is, or continues to be, appropriate for the protection of public health and could, therefore, result in the removal of one or more products from the market.  Any such actions affecting our operating companies’ products could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.Products Regulated in 2009: Most cigarette and smokeless tobacco products currently marketed by PM USA and USSTC are “Provisional Products.”  PM USA and USSTC timely submitted SE reports for these Provisional Products and have received SE determinations on certain Provisional Products.  Those products that were found by the FDA to be not substantially equivalent (certain smokeless tobacco products) had been discontinued for business reasons prior to the FDA’s determinations; therefore, those determinations did not impact business results.  PM USA and USSTC have other Provisional Products that continue to be subject to the FDA’s pre-market review process.  In the meantime, they can continue marketing these products unless the FDA determines that a specific Provisional Product is not substantially equivalent.In addition, the FDA has communicated that it will not review a certain subset of Provisional Product SE reports and that the products that are the subject of those reports can continue to be legally marketed without further FDA review.  PM USA and USSTC have Provisional Products included in this subset of products.While we believe PM USA’s and USSTC’s current Provisional Products meet the statutory requirements of the FSPTCA, we cannot predict how the FDA will ultimately apply law, regulation and guidance to their various SE reports.  Should PM USA or USSTC receive unfavorable determinations on any SE reports currently pending with the FDA, we believe PM USA and USSTC can replace the vast majority of these product volumes with other FDA authorized products or with Pre-existing Tobacco Products.Cigarette and smokeless tobacco products introduced into the market or modified after March 22, 2011 are “Non-Provisional Products” and must receive a marketing order from the FDA prior to being offered for sale.  Marketing orders for Non-Provisional Products may be obtained by filing an SE report, PMTA or using another pre-market pathway established by the FDA.  PM USA and USSTC may not be able to obtain a marketing order for non-provisional products because the FDA may determine that any such product does not meet the statutory requirements for approval.Products Regulated in 2016: Manufacturers of products first regulated by the FDA in 2016, including cigars, oral nicotine pouches and e-vapor products, that were on the market as of August 8, 2016 and not subsequently modified must have filed an SE report or PMTA by the filing deadline of September 9, 2020 in order for their products to remain on the market.  These products can remain on the market during FDA review through court-allowed, case-by-case discretion, so long as the report or application was timely filed with the FDA.  In September 2022, the FDA represented that it had resolved more than 99% of the timely applications it had received, with the vast majority resulting in a denial.  A number of the denials are subject to litigation challenges initiated by the affected manufacturers.  For those products still under FDA review, it is uncertain when and for how long the FDA may permit continued marketing and sale of those products pursuant to its case-by-case discretion.  For products (new or modified) not on the market as of August 8, 2016, manufacturers must file an SE report or PMTA and receive FDA authorization prior to marketing and selling the product.Helix submitted PMTAs for on! oral nicotine pouches in May 2020.  As of April 24, 2023, the FDA has not issued marketing order decisions for any on! products.  In addition, as of April 24, 2023, Middleton has received market orders or exemptions that cover over 99% of its cigar product volume.In April 2019, the FDA authorized the PMTA for the IQOS System, and in July 2020, the FDA authorized the marketing of this system as an MRTP with a reduced exposure claim.  In December 2020, the FDA authorized the PMTA for IQOS 3, an updated version of the IQOS devices, and in March 2022 authorized the marketing of the IQOS 3 device as an MRTP with the same reduced exposure claim.In September 2021, in connection with a patent dispute, the U.S. International Trade Commission (“ITC”) issued a cease and desist order, effective as of November 29, 2021, banning (i) the importation of the IQOS devices, Marlboro HeatSticks and infringing components into the United States and (ii) the sale, marketing and distribution of such imported products in the United States.  As a result, PM USA removed the products from the marketplace.  For a further discussion of the ITC decision, see Note 11.  We have agreed to assign the exclusive U.S. commercialization rights to the IQOS System to Philip Morris International Inc. (“PMI”) effective April 2024 in exchange for a total cash payment of approximately $2.7 billion (plus interest).In October 2021, the FDA authorized the marketing and sale of four of USSTC’s Verve oral nicotine products, including Green Mint and Blue Mint varieties, representing the first flavored product authorizations issued by the FDA for newly deemed innovative products.  These products are not currently marketed or sold.In March 2023, the FDA authorized USSTC to communicate a modified risk claim about its Copenhagen Classic Snuff MST product.  This product is not currently marketed or sold.  The authorized claim for Copenhagen Classic Snuff is “IF YOU SMOKE, CONSIDER THIS:  Switching completely to this product from cigarettes reduces risk of lung cancer.”  USSTC’s authorization to use this claim is subject to the FDA’s post-market surveillance requirements.Post-Market Surveillance: Manufacturers that receive product authorizations through the PMTA process must adhere to the FDA post-market record keeping and reporting requirements, as detailed in market orders and in the final PMTA rule that went into effect in November 2021.  This includes notification of all marketing activities.  The FDA may amend requirements of a market order or withdraw the market order based on this information if, among other reasons, it determines that the continued marketing of the products is no longer appropriate for the protection of the public health.Effect of Adverse FDA Determinations: FDA review time frames have varied.  It is therefore difficult to predict the duration of FDA reviews of SE reports or PMTAs.  An unfavorable determination on an application, the withdrawal by the FDA of a prior marketing order or other changes in FDA regulatory requirements could result in the removal of products from the market.  A “not substantially equivalent” determination, a denial of a PMTA or a marketing order withdrawal by the FDA on one or more products (which would require the removal of the product or products from the market) could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.  Also, adverse FDA determinations on innovative tobacco products could have a material adverse effect on our ability to achieve our Vision.
▪Graphic Warnings: In March 2020, the FDA issued a final rule requiring 11 textual warnings accompanied by color graphics depicting certain negative health consequences of smoking on cigarette packaging and advertising.  The final rule was set to become effective on October 6, 2023.  However, PM USA and other cigarette manufacturers filed lawsuits challenging the final rule on substantive and procedural grounds.  In December 2022, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Texas found in favor of cigarette manufacturers in one such suit and blocked the rule, finding it unconstitutional on the basis that it compelled speech in violation of the First Amendment.  The FDA has appealed the decision.▪Underage Access and Use of Certain Tobacco Products: The FDA announced regulatory actions in September 2018 to address underage access and use of e-vapor products.  We have engaged with the FDA on this topic and have reaffirmed to the FDA our ongoing and long-standing commitment to preventing underage use.  For example, we advocated raising the minimum legal age to purchase all tobacco products to 21 at the federal and state levels to further address underage use, which is now federal law.  See Federal, State and Local Legislation to Increase the Legal Age to Purchase Tobacco Products below for further discussion.  In addition, through our retailer incentive program, stores representing over 80% of PM USA’s cigarette volume have implemented point-of-sale age validation technology.Additionally, the FDA issued final guidance in April 2020, stating that it intends to prioritize enforcement action against certain product categories, including cartridge-based, flavored e-vapor products and products targeted to minors.▪Electronic Nicotine Delivery System Products: As of April 24, 2023, many manufacturers of menthol and other flavored e-vapor products have received MDOs for failure to provide sufficiently strong product-specific scientific evidence to demonstrate that the benefit of their products to adult smokers overcomes the risk that their products pose to youth.  The FDA has communicated in these MDOs that vapor products with non-tobacco flavors present unique questions relevant to the FDA’s “Appropriate for the Protection of Public Health” standard and that successful applications require strong, product-specific evidence.  A number of these manufacturers are appealing the MDOs for their products.
▪Nicotine in Cigarettes and Other Combustible Tobacco Products: In March 2018, the FDA issued an ANPRM seeking comments on the potential public health benefits and any possible adverse effects of lowering nicotine in combustible cigarettes to non-addictive or minimally addictive levels.  Among other issues, the FDA sought comments on (i) whether smokers would compensate by smoking more cigarettes to obtain the same level of nicotine as with their current product and (ii) whether the proposed rule would create an illicit trade of cigarettes containing nicotine at levels higher than a non-addictive threshold that may be established by the FDA.  The FDA also sought comments on whether a nicotine product standard should apply to other combustible tobacco products, including cigars.  In January 2023, the Biden Administration published its Fall 2022 Unified Regulatory Agenda, which includes the FDA’s plans to propose, by October 2023, a product standard that would establish a maximum nicotine level in cigarettes and other combustible tobacco products.  Any proposed product standard would proceed through the rulemaking process, which we believe will take multiple years to complete.▪Flavors in Tobacco Products: In April 2022, the FDA issued two proposed product standards: (i) banning menthol in cigarettes and (ii) banning all characterizing flavors (including menthol) in cigars.  The Biden Administration’s Fall 2022 Unified Regulatory Agenda includes the FDA’s plans to complete rulemaking with respect to these proposed product standards by the end of 2023.  We submitted comments during the notice-and-comment period and plan to continue engaging with the FDA through the rulemaking process.  The FDA could propose an additional product standard for flavors in innovative tobacco products, including e-vapor products and oral nicotine products.▪N-nitrosonornicotine (“NNN”) in Smokeless Tobacco: In January 2017, the FDA proposed a product standard for NNN levels in finished smokeless tobacco products.If any one or more of the foregoing potential product standards were to become final and was appealed and upheld in the courts, it could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position, including a material adverse effect on the carrying value of our assets such as our cigar trademarks.▪Good Manufacturing Practices: In March 2023, the FDA, pursuant to the requirements of the FSPTCA, issued a proposed rule setting forth requirements for tobacco product manufacturers regarding the manufacture, design, packing and storage of their products.  This proposed rule establishes a framework of good manufacturing practices, including by:  ▪establishing tobacco product design and development controls;▪ensuring that finished and bulk tobacco products are manufactured according to established specifications;▪minimizing the manufacture and distribution of tobacco products that do not meet specifications;▪requiring manufacturers to take appropriate measures to prevent contamination of tobacco products;▪requiring investigation and identification of products that do not meet specifications and requiring manufacturers to institute appropriate corrective actions, such as a recall; and▪establishing the ability to trace all components or parts, ingredients, additives and materials, as well as each batch of finished or bulk tobacco products, to aid in investigations of those that do not meet specifications.We plan to engage with the FDA through the rulemaking process, including during the notice-and-comment period.  If the proposed rule were to take effect, compliance with these requirements could result in increased costs.▪Impact on Our Business; Compliance Costs and User Fees: Additional FDA regulatory actions under the FSPTCA could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position in various ways.  For example, actions by the FDA could:▪impact the consumer acceptability of tobacco products;▪delay, discontinue or prevent the sale or distribution of existing, new or modified tobacco products;▪limit adult tobacco consumer choices;▪impose restrictions on communications with adult tobacco consumers;▪create a competitive advantage or disadvantage for certain tobacco companies;▪impose additional manufacturing, labeling or packaging requirements;▪impose additional restrictions at retail;▪result in increased illicit trade in tobacco products; and▪otherwise significantly increase the cost of doing business.The FSPTCA imposes user fees on cigarette, cigarette tobacco, smokeless tobacco, cigar and pipe tobacco manufacturers and importers to pay for the cost of regulation and other matters.  The FSPTCA does not impose user fees on e-vapor or oral nicotine pouch manufacturers.  The cost of the FDA user fee is allocated first among tobacco product categories subject to FDA user fees and then among manufacturers and importers within each respective category based on their relative market shares, all as prescribed by the FSPTCA and FDA regulations.  Payments for user fees are adjusted for several factors, including market share and industry volume.  See Liquidity and Capital Resources - Payments Under State Settlement Agreements and FDA Regulation below for a discussion of our FDA user fee payments.  In addition, compliance with the FSPTCA’s regulatory requirements has resulted, and will continue to result, in additional costs.  The amount of additional compliance and related costs has not been material in any given quarter or year-to-date period but could become material, either individually or in the aggregate.  The failure to comply with FDA regulatory requirements, even inadvertently, and FDA enforcement actions also could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.▪Investigation and Enforcement: The FDA has a number of investigatory and enforcement tools available to it, including document requests and other required information submissions, facility inspections, facility closures, examinations and investigations, injunction proceedings, monetary penalties, product withdrawal and recall orders, and product seizures.  Investigations or enforcement actions could result in significant costs or otherwise have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.
Tobacco products are subject to substantial excise taxes in the United States.  Significant increases in tobacco-related taxes or fees have been proposed or enacted (including with respect to e-vapor products) and are likely to continue to be proposed or enacted at the federal, state and local levels within the United States.  The frequency and magnitude of excise tax increases can be influenced by various factors, including the composition of executive and legislative bodies.Federal, state and local cigarette excise taxes have increased substantially over the past two decades, far outpacing the rate of inflation.  Between the end of 1998 and April 24, 2023, the weighted-average state cigarette excise tax increased from $0.36 to $1.89 per pack.  As of April 24, 2023, no state has enacted new legislation increasing excise taxes in 2023.  However, various increases are under consideration or have been proposed.A majority of states currently tax MST using an ad valorem method, which is calculated as a percentage of the price of the product, typically the wholesale price.  This ad valorem method results in more tax being paid on premium products than is paid on lower-priced products of equal weight.  We support legislation to convert ad valorem taxes on MST to a weight-based methodology because, unlike the ad valorem tax, a weight-based tax subjects cans of equal weight to the same tax.  As of April 24, 2023, the federal government, 23 states, Puerto Rico, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Cook County, Illinois have adopted a weight-based tax methodology for MST.An increasing number of states and localities also are imposing excise taxes on e-vapor products and oral nicotine pouches.  As of April 24, 2023, 30 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and a number of cities and counties have enacted legislation to tax e-vapor products.  These taxes are calculated in varying ways and may differ based on the e-vapor product form.  Similarly, 11 states and the District of Columbia have enacted legislation to tax oral nicotine pouches.Tax increases are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on sales of our operating companies’ products through lower consumption levels and the potential shift in adult tobacco consumer purchases from premium to non-premium or discount cigarettes, to lower taxed tobacco products or to counterfeit and contraband products.  Lower sales volume and reported share performance of our operating companies’ products could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.  In addition, substantial excise tax increases on e-vapor and oral nicotine products may negatively impact adult smokers’ transition to these products, which could materially adversely affect our ability to achieve our Vision.
The World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (the “FCTC”) entered into force in February 2005.  As of April 24, 2023, 181 countries, as well as the European Union, have become parties to the FCTC.  While the United States is a signatory of the FCTC, it is not currently a party to the agreement, as the agreement has not been submitted to, or ratified by, the U.S. Senate.  The FCTC is the first international public health treaty and its objective is to establish a global agenda for tobacco regulation with the purpose of reducing initiation of tobacco use and encouraging cessation.  The treaty recommends (and in certain instances, requires) signatory nations to enact legislation that would address various tobacco-related issues.There are a number of proposals currently under consideration by the governing body of the FCTC, some of which call for substantial restrictions on the manufacture, marketing, distribution and sale of tobacco products.  It is not possible to predict the outcome of these proposals or the impact of any FCTC actions on legislation or regulation in the United States, either indirectly or as a result of the United States becoming a party to the FCTC, or whether or how these actions might indirectly influence FDA regulation and enforcement.
As discussed in Note 11, during 1997 and 1998, PM USA and other major domestic cigarette manufacturers entered into the State Settlement Agreements.  These settlements require participating manufacturers to make substantial annual payments, which are adjusted for several factors, including inflation, operating income, market share and industry volume.  Increases in inflation can increase our financial liability under the State Settlement Agreements.  The State Settlement Agreements’ inflation calculations require us to apply the higher of 3% or the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (“CPI-U”) percentage rate as published in January of each year.  As of December 2022, the inflation calculation was approximately 6.5% based on the latest CPI-U data; however, the increase in the annual payments did not have a material impact on our financial position.  We believe that inflation will continue at increased levels in 2023, but do not expect the corresponding increase in annual payments to result in a material financial impact.  However, we will continue to monitor the impact of increased inflation on the macroeconomic environment and our businesses.For a discussion of the impact of the State Settlement Agreements on us, see Liquidity and Capital Resources - Payments Under State Settlement Agreements and FDA Regulation below and Note 11.  The State Settlement Agreements also place numerous requirements and restrictions on participating manufacturers’ business operations, including prohibitions and restrictions on the advertising and marketing of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco products.  Among these are prohibitions of outdoor and transit brand advertising, payments for product placement and free sampling (except in adult-only facilities).  The State Settlement Agreements also place restrictions on the use of brand name sponsorships and brand name non-tobacco products and prohibitions on targeting youth and the use of cartoon characters.  In addition, the State Settlement Agreements require companies to affirm corporate principles directed at reducing underage use of cigarettes; impose requirements regarding lobbying activities; limit the industry’s ability to challenge certain tobacco control and underage use laws; and provide for the dissolution of certain tobacco-related organizations and place restrictions on the establishment of any replacement organizations.In November 1998, USSTC entered into the Smokeless Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement (the “STMSA”) with the attorneys general of various states and United States territories to resolve the remaining health care cost reimbursement cases initiated against USSTC.  The STMSA required USSTC to adopt various marketing and advertising restrictions.  USSTC is the only smokeless tobacco manufacturer to sign the STMSA.
▪International, Federal, State and Local Regulation: Various states and localities have enacted or proposed legislation that imposes restrictions on tobacco products (including cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, cigars, e-vapor products and oral nicotine pouches), such as legislation that (i) prohibits the sale of all tobacco products or certain tobacco categories, such as e-vapor, (ii) prohibits the sale of tobacco products with characterizing flavors, such as menthol cigarettes and flavored e-vapor products, (iii) requires the disclosure of health information separate from or in addition to federally mandated health warnings and (iv) restricts commercial speech or imposes additional restrictions on the marketing or sale of tobacco products.  The legislation varies in terms of the type of tobacco products, the conditions under which such products are or would be restricted or prohibited, and exceptions to the restrictions or prohibitions.  For example, a number of proposals involving characterizing flavors would prohibit smokeless tobacco products with characterizing flavors without providing an exception for mint- or wintergreen-flavored products.  As of April 24, 2023, multiple states and localities are considering legislation to ban flavors in one or more tobacco products, and six states (California, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Utah, New York and Illinois) and the District of Columbia have passed such legislation.  Some of these states, such as New York, Utah and Illinois, exempt certain products that have received FDA market authorization through the PMTA pathway.  The legislation in California, which became effective in December 2022, bans the sale of most tobacco products with characterizing flavors, including menthol, mint and wintergreen.Massachusetts passed legislation capping the amount of nicotine in e-vapor products.  Similar legislation is pending in four other states.Similar restrictions to those enacted or proposed in various U.S. states and localities on e-vapor and oral nicotine pouch products have been enacted or proposed internationally.We have challenged and will continue to challenge certain federal, state and local legislation and other governmental action, including through litigation.  It is possible, however, that legislation, regulation or other governmental action could be enacted or implemented that could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.  Such action also could negatively impact adult smokers’ transition to smoke-free products, which could materially adversely affect our ability to achieve our Vision.▪Federal, State and Local Legislation to Increase the Legal Age to Purchase Tobacco Products: After a number of states and localities proposed and enacted legislation to increase the minimum age to purchase all tobacco products, including e-vapor products, in December 2019, the federal government passed legislation increasing the minimum age to purchase all tobacco products, including e-vapor products, to 21 nationwide.  As of April 24, 2023, 42 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico have enacted laws increasing the legal age to purchase tobacco products to 21.  Although an increase in the minimum age to purchase tobacco products may have a negative impact on our operating companies’ sales volumes, as discussed above under Underage Access and Use of Certain Tobacco Products, we support raising the minimum legal age to purchase all tobacco products to 21 at the federal and state levels, reflecting our longstanding commitment to combat underage tobacco use.▪Health Effects of Tobacco Products, Including E-vapor Products: Reports with respect to the health effects of smoking have been publicized for many years, including various reports by the U.S. Surgeon General.  We believe that the public should be guided by the messages of the U.S. Surgeon General and public health authorities worldwide in making decisions concerning the use of tobacco products, including e-vapor products.Most jurisdictions within the United States have restricted smoking in public places and some have restricted vaping in public places.  Some public health groups have called for, and various jurisdictions have adopted or proposed, bans on smoking and vaping in outdoor places, in private apartments and in cars transporting children.  It is not possible to predict the results of ongoing scientific research or the types of future scientific research into the health risks of tobacco exposure and the impact of such research on legislation and regulation.▪Other Legislation or Governmental Initiatives: In addition to the actions discussed above, other regulatory initiatives affecting the tobacco industry have been adopted or are being considered at the federal level and in a number of state and local jurisdictions.  For example, in recent years, legislation has been introduced or enacted at the state or local level to subject tobacco products to various reporting requirements and performance standards; establish educational campaigns relating to tobacco consumption or tobacco control programs or provide additional funding for governmental tobacco control activities; restrict the sale of tobacco products in certain retail establishments and the sale of tobacco products in certain package sizes; prohibit the sale of tobacco products based on environmental concerns; impose responsibility on manufacturers for the disposal, recycling or other treatment of post-consumer goods such as plastic packaging; require tax stamping of smokeless tobacco products; require the use of state tax stamps using data encryption technology; and further restrict the sale, marketing and advertising of cigarettes and other tobacco products.  Such legislation may be subject to constitutional or other challenges on various grounds, which may or may not be successful.  In addition, if a pandemic or similar health emergency occurs, state and local governments may reimpose additional health and safety requirements for all businesses, which could result in the potential temporary closure of certain businesses and facilities.  It is possible that tobacco manufacturing and other facilities and the facilities of our suppliers, our suppliers’ suppliers and our trade partners could be subject to additional government-mandated temporary closures and restrictions.It is not possible to predict what, if any, additional legislation, regulation or other governmental action will be enacted or implemented (and, if challenged, upheld) relating to the manufacturing, design, packaging, marketing, advertising, sale or use of tobacco products, or the tobacco industry generally.  Any such legislation, regulation or other governmental action could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.▪Governmental Investigations: From time to time, we are subject to governmental investigations on a range of matters.  For example, we are subject to a number of governmental investigations with respect to our former investment in JUUL, which we divested in March 2023, including the following: (i) the FTC issued a Civil Investigative Demand (“CID”) to us while conducting its antitrust review of our former investment in JUUL seeking information regarding, among other things, our role in the resignation of JUUL’s former chief executive officer and the hiring by JUUL of any current or former Altria director, executive or employee (see Note 11 for a description of the FTC’s administrative complaint against us and JUUL); (ii) the SEC commenced an investigation relating to our acquisition, disclosures and accounting controls in connection with the JUUL investment; and (iii) the New York State Office of the Attorney General and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Office of the Attorney General, separately, issued independent subpoenas to us seeking documents relating to our former investment in and provision of services to JUUL.  For a discussion of our disposition of our interest in JUUL, see Note 3.Additionally, JUUL is currently under investigation by various federal and state agencies, including the SEC, the FDA and the FTC, and state attorneys general.  Such investigations vary in scope but at least some include JUUL’s marketing practices, particularly as such practices relate to youth, and we may be asked in the context of those investigations to provide information concerning our former investment in JUUL or relating to our marketing of Nu Mark LLC e-vapor products.We are a party to lawsuits initiated by the attorneys general of Alaska, Hawaii and New Mexico relating to our former investment in JUUL.  In April 2023, we agreed to settle a lawsuit initiated by the attorney general of Minnesota.
A number of retailers, including national chains, have discontinued the sale of all tobacco products, and others have discontinued the sale of e-vapor products.  Reasons for the discontinuation include change in corporate policy and, with respect to e-vapor products, reported illnesses and the uncertain regulatory environment.  Furthermore, third-party digital platforms, such as app stores, have restricted, and in some cases prohibited, communications with adult tobacco consumers concerning tobacco products.  It is possible that if this private sector activity becomes more widespread it could have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.
Illicit trade in tobacco products can have an adverse impact on our business.  Illicit trade can take many forms, including the sale of counterfeit tobacco products; the sale of tobacco products in the United States that are intended for sale outside the country; the sale of untaxed tobacco products over the Internet and by other means designed to avoid the collection of applicable taxes; and diversion into one taxing jurisdiction of tobacco products intended for sale in another.  Counterfeit tobacco products, for example, are manufactured by unknown third parties in unregulated environments.  Counterfeit versions of our products can negatively affect adult tobacco consumer experiences with and opinions of those brands.  Illicit trade in tobacco products also harms law-abiding wholesalers and retailers by depriving them of lawful sales and undermines the significant investment we have made in legitimate distribution channels.  Moreover, illicit trade in tobacco products results in federal, state and local governments losing tax revenues.  Losses in tax revenues can cause such governments to take various actions, including increasing excise taxes, imposing legislative or regulatory requirements, or asserting claims against manufacturers of tobacco products or members of the trade channels through which such tobacco products are distributed and sold, each of which may have an adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.We communicate with wholesale and retail trade members regarding illicit trade in tobacco products and how we can help prevent such activities, enforce wholesale and retail trade programs and policies that address illicit trade in tobacco products and, when necessary, litigate to protect our trademarks.
Shifts in crops (such as those driven by economic conditions and adverse weather patterns), government restrictions and mandated prices, production control programs, economic trade sanctions, import duties and tariffs, international trade disruptions, inflation, geopolitical instability, climate and environmental changes and disruptions due to man-made or natural disasters may increase the cost or reduce the supply or quality of tobacco, other raw materials, ingredients or component parts used to manufacture our operating companies’ products.  Any significant change in such factors could negatively impact our ability to continue manufacturing and marketing existing products or impact adult consumer product acceptability and have a material adverse effect on our business and profitability.As with other agricultural commodities, tobacco price, quality and availability can be influenced by variations in weather patterns, including those caused by climate change, and macroeconomic conditions and imbalances in supply and demand, among other factors.  For varieties of tobacco only available in limited geographies, government-mandated prices and production control programs, political instability or government prohibitions on the import or export of tobacco in certain countries pose additional risks to price, availability and quality.  In addition, as consumer demand increases for smoke-free products and decreases for combustible products, the volume of tobacco leaf required for production may decrease, resulting in reduced demand.  The reduced demand for tobacco leaf may result in the reduced supply and availability of domestic tobacco as growers divert resources to other crops or cease farming.  The unavailability or unacceptability of any one or more particular varieties of tobacco leaf necessary to manufacture our operating companies’ products could negatively impact our ability to continue marketing existing products or impact adult tobacco consumer product acceptability, which could result in increased costs to us.Current macroeconomic conditions and geopolitical instability (including high inflation, high gas prices, rising interest rates, labor shortages, supply and demand imbalances and the Russian invasion of Ukraine) have caused and continue to cause worldwide disruptions and delays to supply chains and commercial markets, which limit access to, and increase the cost of, raw materials, ingredients and component parts (for example, tobacco leaf and resins and aluminum used in our packaging).  We have implemented and continue to implement various strategies to help secure sufficient supplies of raw materials, ingredients and component parts for production.In addition, government taxes, restrictions and prohibitions on the sale and use of certain products may limit access to, and increase the costs of, raw materials and component parts and, potentially, impede our ability to sell certain of our operating companies’ products.  For example, additional taxes on the use of certain single-use plastics have been proposed by the U.S. Congress, which, if passed, could increase the costs of, and impair our ability to, source certain materials used in the packaging for our operating companies’ products.We work to mitigate these risks by maintaining inventory levels of certain tobacco varieties that cover several years, purchasing raw materials, ingredients and component parts from disperse geographic regions throughout the world and entering into long-term contracts with some of our tobacco growers and direct material suppliers.  To date, the impact on us of changes in the price, availability and quality of tobacco, other raw materials, ingredients and component parts has not been material.  However, the effects of the current macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions on prices, availability and quality of such items may continue, which could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position.
In the ordinary course of business, we are subject to many influences that can impact the timing of sales to customers, including the timing of holidays and other annual or special events, the timing of promotions, customer incentive programs and customer inventory programs, as well as the actual or speculated timing of pricing actions and tax-driven price increases.
The following table summarizes operating results, includes reported and adjusted OCI margins and provides a reconciliation of reported OCI to adjusted OCI for our smokeable products segment:
(1) Reported and adjusted OCI margins are calculated as reported and adjusted OCI, respectively, divided by revenues net of excise taxes.
Net revenues, which include excise taxes billed to customers, decreased $175 million (3.3%), due primarily to lower shipment volume ($654 million), partially offset by higher pricing ($472 million), which includes higher promotional investments.Reported OCI decreased $56 million (2.2%), due primarily to lower shipment volume ($404 million), higher per unit settlement charges and NPM Adjustment Items in 2022 ($60 million), partially offset by higher pricing, which includes higher promotional investments.Adjusted OCI was essentially unchanged as higher pricing, which includes higher promotional investments, was mostly offset by lower shipment volume and higher per unit settlement charges.
The following table summarizes our smokeable products segment’s shipment volume performance:
Note: Cigarettes shipment volume includes Marlboro; Other premium brands, such as Virginia Slims, Parliament and Benson & Hedges; and Discount brands, which include L&M, Basic and Chesterfield.  Cigarettes volume includes units sold as well as promotional units but excludes units sold for distribution to Puerto Rico, U.S. Territories to overseas military and by Philip Morris Duty Free Inc., none of which, individually or in the aggregate, is material to our smokeable products segment.The following table summarizes our cigarettes retail share performance:
Note: Retail share results for cigarettes are based on data from Circana, Inc. and Circana Group, L.P. (“Circana”), formerly IRI, as well as, Management Science Associates, Inc. (“MSA”).  Circana is a newly formed company reflecting the recent merger of IRI and NPD Group, Inc.  Circana maintains a blended retail service that uses a sample of stores and certain wholesale shipments to project market share and depict share trends.  Similar to prior reporting, this service tracks sales in the food, drug, mass merchandisers, convenience, military, dollar store and club trade classes.  For other trade classes selling cigarettes, retail share is based on shipments from wholesalers to retailers through the Store Tracking Analytical Reporting System (“STARS”), as provided by MSA.  This service is not designed to capture sales through other channels, including the internet, direct mail and some illicitly tax-advantaged outlets.  It is retail services’ standard practice to periodically refresh their retail scan services, which could restate retail share results that were previously released in this service.For a discussion of volume trends and factors that impact volume and retail share performance, see Tobacco Space - Business Environment above.
Our smokeable products segment’s reported domestic cigarettes shipment volume decreased 11.4%, driven primarily by the industry’s decline rate, retail share losses (both of which were impacted by macroeconomic pressures on adult tobacco consumers’ disposable income) and trade inventory movements, partially offset by calendar differences.  When adjusted for trade inventory movements and calendar differences, our smokeable products segment’s reported domestic cigarettes shipment volume decreased by an estimated 11%.  When adjusted for calendar differences, trade inventory movements and other factors, total estimated domestic cigarette industry volume decreased by an estimated 9%.Shipments of premium cigarettes accounted for 94.3% and 93.3% of our smokeable products segment’s reported domestic cigarettes shipment volume for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.Marlboro’s retail share of the total cigarette category decreased 0.6 share points versus the prior year and 0.2 share points sequentially to 42.0%, primarily due to increased macroeconomic pressures on adult tobacco consumers’ disposable income and increased competitive activity.  However, Marlboro’s share of the premium segment grew to 58.5%, an increase of 0.7 share points versus the prior year and 0.1 share point sequentially.Total cigarettes industry discount segment retail share increased 1.8 share points versus the prior year and 0.5 share points sequentially to 28.2%, primarily due to increased macroeconomic pressures on adult tobacco consumers’ disposable income and increased competitive activity.For a discussion regarding discount product dynamics in 2023 and the economic conditions, including a high inflationary environment, that impact adult tobacco consumer purchasing behavior, see Operating Results by Business Segment - Tobacco Space - Business Environment - Summary above.
PM USA and Middleton executed the following pricing and promotional allowance actions during 2023 and 2022:▪Effective January 22, 2023, PM USA increased the list price of Marlboro, L&M, Basic and Chesterfield by $0.15 per pack.  PM USA also increased the list price of all its other cigarette brands by $0.20 per pack.▪Effective October 16, 2022, PM USA increased the list price of Marlboro, L&M, Basic and Chesterfield by $0.15 per pack.  PM USA also increased the list price of all its other cigarette brands by $0.20 per pack.▪Effective July 17, 2022, PM USA increased the list price on all of its cigarette brands by $0.15 per pack.▪Effective May 22, 2022, Middleton increased various list prices across substantially all of its cigar brands resulting in a weighted-average increase of approximately $0.17 per five-pack.▪Effective April 24, 2022, PM USA increased the list price of Marlboro, L&M, Basic and Chesterfield by $0.15 per pack.  PM USA also increased the list price of all its other cigarette brands by $0.20 per pack.▪Effective January 9, 2022, Middleton increased various list prices across substantially all of its cigar brands resulting in a weighted-average increase of approximately $0.13 per five-pack.In addition:▪Effective April 23, 2023, PM USA increased the list price of Marlboro, L&M and Basic by $0.15 per pack.  PM USA also increased the list price of all its other cigarette brands by $0.20 per pack.
The following table summarizes operating results, includes reported and adjusted OCI margins, and provides a reconciliation of reported OCI to adjusted OCI for our oral tobacco products segment:
(1) Reported and adjusted OCI margins are calculated as reported and adjusted OCI, respectively, divided by revenues net of excise taxes.
Net revenues, which include excise taxes billed to customers, increased $15 million (2.4%), due primarily to higher pricing ($39 million), which includes higher promotional investments, partially offset by lower shipment volume and a higher percentage of on! shipment volume relative to MST (“volume/mix”) versus 2022 ($22 million).Reported and adjusted OCI increased $9 million (2.2%), due primarily to higher pricing, which includes higher promotional investments, partially offset by lower volume/mix ($25 million).
The following table summarizes our oral tobacco products segment’s shipment volume performance:
Note: Other primarily includes Red Seal and Husky.  Oral tobacco products shipment volume includes cans and packs sold, as well as promotional units, but excludes international volume, which is currently not material to our oral tobacco products segment.  New types of oral tobacco products, as well as new packaging configurations of existing oral tobacco products, may or may not be equivalent to existing MST products on a can-for-can basis.  To calculate volumes of cans and packs shipped, one pack of snus or one can of oral nicotine pouches, irrespective of the number of pouches in the pack or can, is assumed to be equivalent to one can of MST.The following table summarizes our oral tobacco products segment’s retail share performance (excluding international volume):
Note: Our oral tobacco products segment’s retail share results exclude international volume, which is currently not material to our oral tobacco products segment.  Retail share results for oral tobacco products are based on data from Circana, a tracking service that uses a sample of stores to project market share and depict share trends.  This service tracks sales in the food, drug, mass merchandisers, convenience, military, dollar store and club trade classes on the number of cans and packs sold.  Oral tobacco products are defined by Circana as MST, snus and oral nicotine pouches.  New types of oral tobacco products, as well as new packaging configurations of existing oral tobacco products, may or may not be equivalent to existing MST products on a can-for-can basis.  For example, one pack of snus or one can of oral nicotine pouches, irrespective of the number of pouches in the pack or can, is assumed to be equivalent to one can of MST.  Because this service represents retail share performance only in key trade channels, it should not be considered a precise measurement of actual retail share.  It is retail services’ standard practice to periodically refresh their retail scan services, which could restate retail share results that were previously released in this service.For a discussion of volume trends and factors that impact volume and retail share performance, see Tobacco Space - Business Environment above.
Our oral tobacco products segment’s reported domestic shipment volume decreased 1.8%, driven primarily by retail share losses, trade inventory movements and other factors, partially offset by calendar differences and the industry’s growth rate.  When adjusted for calendar differences and trade inventory movements, our oral tobacco products segment’s reported domestic shipment volume decreased by an estimated 3%.Total oral tobacco products category industry volume increased by an estimated 1% for the six months ended March 31, 2023, primarily driven by growth in oral nicotine pouches, partially offset by declines in MST volumes.Our oral tobacco products segment’s retail share was 45.2%, and Copenhagen continued to be the leading oral tobacco brand with a retail share of 25.4%.  In the oral tobacco products segment, share declines for MST products were primarily driven by the share growth of oral nicotine pouches.The U.S. nicotine pouch category grew to 26.2% of the U.S. oral tobacco category, an increase of 7.1 share points versus the prior year.  In addition, on! share of the nicotine pouch category grew to 24.6%, an increase of 3.3 share points versus the prior year.
USSTC executed the following pricing actions during 2023 and 2022:▪Effective January 24, 2023, USSTC increased the list price on its Copenhagen, Skoal, Red Seal and Husky brands by $0.09 per can.▪Effective July 26, 2022, USSTC increased the list price on its Copenhagen popular price products by $0.13 per can.  USSTC also decreased the list price on select Copenhagen brands by $0.11 per can.  In addition, USSTC increased the list price on its Skoal and Red Seal brands and the balance of its Copenhagen brands by $0.09 per can and increased the list price on its Husky brand by $0.12 per can.▪Effective May 24, 2022, USSTC increased the list price on its Copenhagen, Skoal and Red Seal brands by $0.09 per can.  USSTC also increased the list price on its Husky brand by $0.12 per can.▪Effective February 22, 2022, USSTC increased the list price on its Copenhagen, Skoal and Red Seal brands by $0.08 per can.  USSTC also increased the list price on its Husky brand by $0.12 per can.In addition:▪Effective April 25, 2023, USSTC increased the list price on its Copenhagen popular price products, Red Seal and Husky brands by $0.09 per can.  In addition, USSTC increased the list price on its Skoal brands and on the balance of its Copenhagen brands by $0.10 per can.
We are a holding company that is primarily dependent on the capital resources of our subsidiaries to satisfy our liquidity requirements.  Our access to the operating cash flows of our wholly owned subsidiaries consists of cash received from the payment of dividends and distributions, and the payment of interest on intercompany loans.  At March 31, 2023, our significant wholly owned subsidiaries were not limited by contractual obligations in their ability to pay cash dividends or make other distributions with respect to their equity interests.  In addition, we receive cash dividends on our interest in ABI and will continue to do so as long as ABI pays dividends.At March 31, 2023, we had $3.9 billion of cash and cash equivalents.  In addition to having access to the operating cash flows of our wholly owned subsidiaries, our capital resources include access to credit markets in the form of commercial paper, availability under our $3.0 billion senior unsecured 5-year revolving credit agreement (as amended, the “Credit Agreement”), which we use for general corporate purposes and access to credit markets through the issuance of long-term senior unsecured notes.  For additional information, see Capital Markets and Other Matters below.In addition to funding current operations, we primarily use our net cash from operating activities for payment of dividends, share repurchases under our share repurchase programs, repayment of debt, acquisitions of or investments in businesses and assets, and capital expenditures.We believe our cash and cash equivalents balance, along with our future cash flows from operations, capacity for borrowings under the Credit Agreement and access to credit and capital markets, provide sufficient liquidity to meet the needs of our business operations and to satisfy our projected cash requirements for the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Credit Ratings - Our cost and terms of financing and our access to commercial paper markets may be impacted by applicable credit ratings.  The impact of credit ratings on the cost of borrowings under the Credit Agreement is discussed in Note 9. Debt to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1 (“Note 9”).At March 31, 2023, the credit ratings and outlook for our indebtedness by major credit rating agencies were:
Credit Lines - From time to time, we have short-term borrowing needs to meet our working capital requirements arising from the timing of annual MSA payments, quarterly income tax payments and quarterly dividend payments, and generally use our commercial paper program to meet those needs.At March 31, 2023, we had availability under the Credit Agreement for borrowings of up to an aggregate principal amount of $3.0 billion, and we were in compliance with the covenants in the Credit Agreement.  We expect to continue to meet the covenants in the Credit Agreement.  We monitor the credit quality of our bank group and are not aware of any potential non-performing credit provider in that group.  For further discussion on short-term borrowings, see Note 9.Debt - At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, our total debt was $25.4 billion and $26.7 billion, respectively.  In February 2023, we repaid in full our 1.000% senior unsecured Euro notes in the aggregate principal amount of $1.3 billion (€1.25 billion) at maturity.  As a result of the repayment and changes in the Euro exchange rate, the weighted-average coupon interest rate on our total long-term debt increased to approximately 4.2% at March 31, 2023 from approximately 4.0% at December 31, 2022.  For further details on long-term debt, see Note 9.Guarantees and Other Similar Matters - As discussed in Note 11, we had unused letters of credit obtained in the ordinary course of business and guarantees (including third-party guarantees) outstanding at March 31, 2023.  From time to time, we also issue lines of credit to affiliated entities.  In addition, as discussed below in Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information and in Note 9, PM USA has issued guarantees relating to our obligations under our outstanding debt securities, borrowings under the Credit Agreement and amounts outstanding under the commercial paper program.  These items have not had, and are not expected to have, a significant impact on our liquidity.Payments Under State Settlement Agreements and FDA Regulation - As discussed in Note 11, PM USA has entered into State Settlement Agreements with the states, the District of Columbia and certain U.S. territories that call for certain payments.  In addition, PM USA, Middleton and USSTC are subject to quarterly user fees imposed by the FDA as a result of the FSPTCA.  For further discussion of the resolutions of certain disputes with states and territories related to the NPM adjustment provision under the MSA, see Health Care Cost Recovery Litigation - NPM Adjustment Disputes in Note 11.Based on current agreements, estimated market share, estimated annual industry volume decline rates and inflation rates, the estimated amounts that we may charge to cost of sales for payments related to State Settlement Agreements and FDA user fees are $4.0 billion on average for the next three years.  These amounts exclude the potential impact of any NPM Adjustment Items.The estimated amounts due under the State Settlement Agreements charged to cost of sales in each year are generally paid in April of the following year.  The amounts charged to cost of sales for FDA user fees are generally paid in the quarter in which the fees are incurred.  We paid approximately $3.2 billion in April 2023 for amounts accrued in 2022 under the State Settlement Agreements.  We recorded $1.0 billion of charges to cost of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, in connection with the State Settlement Agreements and FDA user fees.  As previously stated, the payments due under the terms of the State Settlement Agreements and FDA user fees are subject to adjustment for several factors, including volume, operating income, inflation and certain contingent events and, in general, are allocated based on each manufacturer’s market share.  The future payment amounts discussed above are estimates, and actual payment amounts will differ to the extent underlying assumptions differ from actual future results.  For further discussion on the potential impact of inflation on future payments, see Operating Results by Business Segment - Tobacco Space - State Settlement Agreements.Litigation-Related Deposits and Payments - With respect to certain adverse verdicts currently on appeal, to obtain stays of judgments pending appeals, as of March 31, 2023, PM USA had posted appeal bonds totaling $46 million, which have been collateralized with restricted cash that is included in assets on our condensed consolidated balance sheet.Litigation is subject to uncertainty, and an adverse outcome or settlement of litigation could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, cash flows or financial position in a particular fiscal quarter or fiscal year, as more fully disclosed in Note 11.NJOY Acquisition - In March 2023, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire NJOY for approximately $2.75 billion in cash payable at closing plus up to an additional $500 million in cash payments that are contingent upon regulatory outcomes with respect to certain NJOY products.  We have multiple sources of funding for the NJOY Transaction, including our operating cash flows, access to credit markets, committed short-term bank financing and future cash payments from PMI, as discussed below.  The completion of the NJOY Transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and is not subject to any financing condition.  For further discussion, see Executive Summary - Our Business above.Altria and PMI Purchase Agreement - In 2022, we entered into an agreement with PMI to, among other things, transition and ultimately conclude our relationship with respect to the IQOS System in the United States.  We received a payment of $1.0 billion in 2022 and expect to receive an additional payment of $1.7 billion (plus interest) by July 2023 for a total cash payment of approximately $2.7 billion (plus interest).  We expect to use the cash proceeds for several items, which may include investments in pursuit of our Vision, repayment of debt, share repurchases and general corporate purposes.
During the first three months of 2023 and 2022, we paid dividends of $1,683 million and $1,645 million, respectively, an increase of 2.3%, reflecting a higher dividend rate, partially offset by fewer shares outstanding as a result of shares we repurchased under our share repurchase program.  Our current annualized dividend rate is $3.76 per share.  In March 2023, we established a new progressive dividend goal that targets mid-single digits dividend growth annually.  Future dividend payments remain subject to the discretion of our Board of Directors (“Board of Directors” or “Board”).For a discussion of our share repurchase programs, see Note 1. Background and Basis of Presentation to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1  and Part II, Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds of this Form 10-Q.
During the first three months of 2023, net cash provided by operating activities was $2,984 million compared with $3,075 million during the first three months of 2022.  This decrease was due primarily to lower net revenues.We had a working capital deficit at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.  Our management believes that we have the ability to fund working capital deficits with cash provided by operating activities, borrowings under the Credit Agreement and access to the credit and capital markets.
During the first three months of 2023, net cash used in investing activities was $56 million compared with $34 million during the first three months of 2022.  This increase was due primarily to higher capital expenditures and proceeds from finance asset sales in 2022.
During the first three months of 2023, net cash used in financing activities was $3,045 million compared with $2,232 million during the first three months of 2022.  This increase was due primarily to the following:▪repayment of $1.3 billion in full of our 1.000% senior unsecured Euro notes at their scheduled maturity in February 2023; and▪higher dividends paid in 2023;partially offset by:▪repurchases of common stock in 2022.
See Note 12. New Accounting Guidance Not Yet Adopted to our condensed consolidated financial statements in Item 1 for a discussion of issued accounting guidance applicable to, but not yet adopted by, us.
See Note 11 for a discussion of contingencies.
PM USA (the “Guarantor”), which is a 100% owned subsidiary of Altria Group, Inc. (the “Parent”), has guaranteed the Parent’s obligations under its outstanding debt securities, borrowings under its Credit Agreement and amounts outstanding under its commercial paper program (the “Guarantees”).  Pursuant to the Guarantees, the Guarantor fully and unconditionally guarantees, as primary obligor, the payment and performance of the Parent’s obligations under the guaranteed debt instruments (the “Obligations”), subject to release under certain customary circumstances as noted below.The Guarantees provide that the Guarantor guarantees the punctual payment when due, whether at stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise, of the Obligations.  The liability of the Guarantor under the Guarantees is absolute and unconditional irrespective of: any lack of validity, enforceability or genuineness of any provision of any agreement or instrument relating thereto; any change in the time, manner or place of payment of, or in any other term of, all or any of the Obligations, or any other amendment or waiver of or any consent to departure from any agreement or instrument relating thereto; any exchange, release or non-perfection of any collateral, or any release or amendment or waiver of or consent to departure from any other guarantee, for all or any of the Obligations; or any other circumstance that might otherwise constitute a defense available to, or a discharge of, the Parent or the Guarantor.Under applicable provisions of federal bankruptcy law or comparable provisions of state fraudulent transfer law, the Guarantees could be voided, or claims in respect of the Guarantees could be subordinated to the debts of the Guarantor, if, among other things, the Guarantor, at the time it incurred the Obligations evidenced by the Guarantees:▪received less than reasonably equivalent value or fair consideration therefor; and▪either:▪was insolvent or rendered insolvent by reason of such occurrence;▪was engaged in a business or transaction for which the assets of the Guarantor constituted unreasonably small capital; or▪intended to incur, or believed that it would incur, debts beyond its ability to pay such debts as they mature.In addition, under such circumstances, the payment of amounts by the Guarantor pursuant to the Guarantees could be voided and required to be returned to the Guarantor, or to a fund for the benefit of the Guarantor, as the case may be.The measures of insolvency for purposes of the foregoing considerations will vary depending upon the law applied in any proceeding with respect to the foregoing.  Generally, however, the Guarantor would be considered insolvent if:▪the sum of its debts, including contingent liabilities, was greater than the saleable value of its assets, all at a fair valuation;▪the present fair saleable value of its assets was less than the amount that would be required to pay its probable liability on its existing debts, including contingent liabilities, as they become absolute and mature; or▪it could not pay its debts as they become due.To the extent the Guarantees are voided as a fraudulent conveyance or held unenforceable for any other reason, the holders of the guaranteed debt obligations would not have any claim against the Guarantor and would be creditors solely of the Parent.The obligations of the Guarantor under the Guarantees are limited to the maximum amount as will not result in the Guarantor’s obligations under the Guarantees constituting a fraudulent transfer or conveyance, after giving effect to such maximum amount and all other contingent and fixed liabilities of the Guarantor that are relevant under Bankruptcy Law, the Uniform Fraudulent Conveyance Act, the Uniform Fraudulent Transfer Act or any similar federal or state law to the extent applicable to the Guarantees.  For this purpose, “Bankruptcy Law” means Title 11, U.S. Code, or any similar federal or state law for the relief of debtors.The Guarantor will be unconditionally released and discharged from the Obligations upon the earliest to occur of:▪the date, if any, on which the Guarantor consolidates with or merges into the Parent or any successor;▪the date, if any, on which the Parent or any successor consolidates with or merges into the Guarantor;▪the payment in full of the Obligations pertaining to such Guarantees; and▪the rating of the Parent’s long-term senior unsecured debt by S&P of A or higher.The Parent is a holding company; therefore, its access to the operating cash flows of its wholly owned subsidiaries consists of cash received from the payment of dividends and distributions, and the payment of interest on intercompany loans by its subsidiaries.  Neither the Guarantor nor other 100% owned subsidiaries of the Parent that are not guarantors of the debt (“Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”) are limited by contractual obligations on their ability to pay cash dividends or make other distributions with respect to their equity interests.The following tables include summarized financial information for the Parent and the Guarantor.  Transactions between the Parent and the Guarantor (including investment and intercompany balances as well as equity earnings) have been eliminated.  The Parent’s and the Guarantor’s intercompany balances with Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries have been presented separately.  This summarized financial information is not intended to present the financial position or results of operations of the Parent or the Guarantor in accordance with GAAP.
(1) For the three months ended March 31, 2023, net earnings (losses) includes $57 million of intercompany interest income and $89 million of interest expense from non-guarantor subsidiaries.(2) For the three months ended March 31, 2023, net earnings (losses) includes $58 million of intercompany interest income from non-guarantor subsidiaries.
This Form 10-Q contains statements concerning our expectations, plans, objectives, future financial performance and other statements that are not historical facts.  You can identify these forward-looking statements by use of words such as “strategy,” “expects,” “continues,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “believes,” “will,” “estimates,” “forecasts,” “intends,” “projects,” “goals,” “objectives,” “guidance,” “targets” and other words of similar meaning.  You can also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts.We cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized, although we believe we have been prudent in our plans, estimates and assumptions.  Achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that may prove to be inaccurate.  Should known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying estimates or assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could differ materially from those anticipated, estimated or projected.  You should bear this in mind as you consider our forward-looking statements and whether to invest in or remain invested in our securities.  In connection with the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we are identifying important factors that, individually or in the aggregate, could cause actual results and outcomes, including with respect to our ability to achieve our Vision, to differ materially from those contained in, or implied by, any forward-looking statements we made.  Any such statement is qualified by reference to the following cautionary statements.  We elaborate on these important factors and the risks we face throughout this Form 10-Q, particularly in the “Executive Summary” and “Business Environment” sections preceding our discussion of the operating results of our segments above, in Part II, Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-Q, and in our other publicly filed reports, including our 2022 Form 10-K.  These factors and risks include the following:▪our inability to anticipate and respond to changes in adult tobacco consumer preferences and purchase behavior;▪our inability to compete effectively;▪the growth of the e-vapor category and other innovative tobacco products, including oral nicotine pouches, contributing to reductions in cigarette and MST consumption levels and shipment volume;▪our failure to commercialize innovative products, including tobacco products that may reduce health risks relative to other tobacco products and appeal to adult tobacco consumers;▪changes, including in macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions (including inflation), that result in shifts in adult tobacco consumer disposable income and purchasing behavior, including choosing lower-priced and discount brands or products;▪unfavorable outcomes with respect to litigation proceedings or any governmental investigations;▪the risks associated with significant federal, state and local government actions, including FDA regulatory actions, and various private sector actions;▪increases in tobacco product-related taxes;▪our failure to complete or manage successfully strategic transactions, including the NJOY Transaction and other acquisitions, dispositions, joint ventures and investments in third parties or realize the anticipated benefits of such transactions;▪significant changes in price, availability or quality of tobacco, other raw materials or component parts, including as a result of changes in macroeconomic, climate and geopolitical conditions; ▪our reliance on a few significant facilities and a small number of key suppliers, distributors and distribution chain service providers and the risks associated with an extended disruption at a facility or in service by a supplier, distributor or distribution chain service provider;▪the risk that we may be required to write down intangible assets, including trademarks and goodwill, due to impairment;▪the risk that we could decide, or be required to, recall products;▪the various risks related to health epidemics and pandemics, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and the measures that international, federal, state and local governments, agencies, law enforcement and health authorities implement to address them;▪our inability to attract and retain a highly skilled and diverse workforce due to the decreasing social acceptance of tobacco usage, tobacco control actions and other factors;▪the risks associated with the various U.S. and foreign laws and regulations to which we are subject due to our international business operations;▪the risks concerning a challenge to our tax positions, an increase in the income tax rate or other changes to federal or state tax laws;▪the risks associated with legal and regulatory requirements related to climate change and other environmental sustainability matters;▪disruption and uncertainty in the credit and capital markets, including risk of losing access to these markets;▪a downgrade or potential downgrade of our credit ratings;▪our inability to attract investors due to increasing investor expectations of our performance relating to environmental, social and governance factors;▪the failure of our, or our key service providers’ or key suppliers’, information systems to function as intended, or cyber-attacks or security breaches; ▪our failure to comply with personal data protection and privacy laws;▪the risk that the expected benefits of our investment in ABI may not materialize in the expected manner or timeframe or at all, including due to macroeconomic and geopolitical conditions; foreign currency exchange rates; ABI’s business results; ABI’s share price; impairment losses on the value of our investment; our incurrence of additional tax liabilities related to our investment in ABI; and potential reductions in the number of directors that we can have appointed to the ABI board of directors;▪the risks related to the FTC’s challenge with respect to our former investment in JUUL, which, if successful, could result in a broad range of resolutions, as well as the outcome of certain other related putative class actions; and▪the risks associated with our investment in Cronos, including legal, regulatory and reputational risks and the risk that the expected benefits of the transaction may not materialize in the expected timeframe or at all.You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all factors and risks.  Consequently, you should not consider the foregoing list to be complete.  We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement that we may make from time to time except as required by applicable law.