
Some of the statements, estimates or projections contained in this report are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S. federal securities laws intended to qualify for the safe harbor from liability established by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.  All statements other than statements of historical facts contained, or incorporated by reference, in this report, including, without limitation, those regarding our business strategy, financial position, results of operations, plans, prospects, actions taken or strategies being considered with respect to our liquidity position, valuation and appraisals of our assets and objectives of management for future operations (including those regarding expected fleet additions, our expectations regarding the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and general macroeconomic conditions, our expectations regarding cruise voyage occupancy, the implementation of and effectiveness of our health and safety protocols, operational position, demand for voyages, plans or goals for our sustainability program and decarbonization efforts, our expectations for future cash flows and profitability, financing opportunities and extensions, and future cost mitigation and cash conservation efforts and efforts to reduce operating expenses and capital expenditures) are forward-looking statements.  Many, but not all, of these statements can be found by looking for words like “expect,” “anticipate,” “goal,” “project,” “plan,” “believe,” “seek,” “will,” “may,” “forecast,” “estimate,” “intend,” “future” and similar words.  Forward-looking statements do not guarantee future performance and may involve risks, uncertainties and other factors which could cause our actual results, performance or achievements to differ materially from the future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied in those forward-looking statements.  Examples of these risks, uncertainties and other factors include, but are not limited to the impact of:●adverse general economic factors, such as fluctuating or increasing levels of interest rates, inflation, unemployment, underemployment and the volatility of fuel prices, declines in the securities and real estate markets, and perceptions of these conditions that decrease the level of disposable income of consumers or consumer confidence;●the spread of epidemics, pandemics and viral outbreaks, including the COVID-19 pandemic, and their effect on the ability or desire of people to travel (including on cruises), which is expected to continue to adversely impact our results, operations, outlook, plans, goals, growth, reputation, cash flows, liquidity, demand for voyages and share price;●implementing precautions in coordination with regulators and global public health authorities to protect the health, safety and security of guests, crew and the communities we visit and to comply with regulatory restrictions related to the pandemic;●our indebtedness and restrictions in the agreements governing our indebtedness that require us to maintain minimum levels of liquidity and be in compliance with maintenance covenants and otherwise limit our flexibility in operating our business, including the significant portion of assets that are collateral under these agreements;●our ability to work with lenders and others or otherwise pursue options to defer, renegotiate, refinance or restructure our existing debt profile, near-term debt amortization, newbuild related payments and other obligations and to work with credit card processors to satisfy current or potential future demands for collateral on cash advanced from customers relating to future cruises;●our need for additional financing or financing to optimize our balance sheet, which may not be available on favorable terms, or at all, and our outstanding exchangeable notes and any future financing which may be dilutive to existing shareholders;●the unavailability of ports of call;
●future increases in the price of, or major changes, disruptions or reduction in, commercial airline services;●changes involving the tax and environmental regulatory regimes in which we operate, including new regulations aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions;●the accuracy of any appraisals of our assets as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise;●our success in controlling operating expenses and capital expenditures;●trends in, or changes to, future bookings and our ability to take future reservations and receive deposits related thereto;●adverse events impacting the security of travel, or customer perceptions of the security of travel, such as terrorist acts, armed conflict, such as Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and threats thereof, acts of piracy, and other international events;●adverse incidents involving cruise ships;●breaches in data security or other disturbances to our information technology and other networks or our actual or perceived failure to comply with requirements regarding data privacy and protection;●changes in fuel prices and the type of fuel we are permitted to use and/or other cruise operating costs;●mechanical malfunctions and repairs, delays in our shipbuilding program, maintenance and refurbishments and the consolidation of qualified shipyard facilities;●the risks and increased costs associated with operating internationally;●our inability to recruit or retain qualified personnel or the loss of key personnel or employee relations issues;●our inability to obtain adequate insurance coverage;●pending or threatened litigation, investigations and enforcement actions;●volatility and disruptions in the global credit and financial markets, which may adversely affect our ability to borrow and could increase our counterparty credit risks, including those under our credit facilities, derivatives, contingent obligations, insurance contracts and new ship progress payment guarantees;●any further impairment of our trademarks, trade names or goodwill;●our reliance on third parties to provide hotel management services for certain ships and certain other services;●fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates;●our expansion into new markets and investments in new markets and land-based destination projects;●overcapacity in key markets or globally; and●other factors set forth under “Risk Factors” herein and in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, filed with the SEC on February 28, 2023 (“Annual Report on Form 10-K”).
Additionally, many of these risks and uncertainties are currently amplified by and will continue to be amplified by, or in the future may be amplified by, the COVID-19 pandemic, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and the impact of general macroeconomic conditions.  It is not possible to predict or identify all such risks.  There may be additional risks that we consider immaterial or which are unknown.The above examples are not exhaustive and new risks emerge from time to time. Such forward-looking statements are based on our current beliefs, assumptions, expectations, estimates and projections regarding our present and future business strategies and the environment in which we expect to operate in the future. These forward-looking statements speak only as of the date made. We expressly disclaim any obligation or undertaking to release publicly any updates or revisions to any forward-looking statement to reflect any change in our expectations with regard thereto or any change of events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statement was based, except as required by law.
This report includes certain non-GAAP financial measures, such as Adjusted Gross Margin, Net Yield, Net Cruise Cost, Adjusted Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS. Definitions of these non-GAAP financial measures are included below. For further information about our non-GAAP financial measures including detailed adjustments made in calculation our non-GAAP financial measures and a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, we refer you to “Results of Operations” below.Unless otherwise indicated in this report, the following terms have the meanings set forth below: ●2024 Exchangeable Notes. On May 8, 2020, pursuant to an indenture among NCLC, as issuer, NCLH, as guarantor, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, NCLC issued $862.5 million aggregate principal amount of exchangeable senior notes due 2024.●2025 Exchangeable Notes. On July 21, 2020, pursuant to an indenture among NCLC, as issuer, NCLH, as guarantor, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, NCLC issued $450.0 million aggregate principal amount of exchangeable senior notes due 2025.●2027 1.125% Exchangeable Notes. On November 19, 2021, pursuant to an indenture among NCLC, as issuer, NCLH, as guarantor, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, NCLC issued $1,150.0 million aggregate principal amount of exchangeable senior notes due 2027.●2027 2.5% Exchangeable Notes. On February 15, 2022, pursuant to an indenture among NCLC, as issuer, NCLH, as guarantor, and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee, NCLC issued $473.2 million aggregate principal amount of exchangeable senior notes due 2027.●Adjusted EBITDA. EBITDA adjusted for other income (expense), net and other supplemental adjustments.●Adjusted EPS. Adjusted Net Loss divided by the number of diluted weighted-average shares outstanding.●Adjusted Gross Margin. Gross margin adjusted for payroll and related, fuel, food, other and ship depreciation. Gross margin is calculated pursuant to GAAP as total revenue less total cruise operating expense and ship depreciation.●Adjusted Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel. Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel adjusted for supplemental adjustments.●Adjusted Net Loss. Net loss adjusted for supplemental adjustments.●Allura Class Ships.  Oceania Cruises’ Vista and Oceania Cruises’ Allura.
●Berths. Double occupancy capacity per cabin (single occupancy per studio cabin) even though many cabins can accommodate three or more passengers.●Capacity Days. Berths available for sale multiplied by the number of cruise days for the period for ships in service. ●Dry-dock. A process whereby a ship is positioned in a large basin where all of the fresh/sea water is pumped out in order to carry out cleaning and repairs of those parts of a ship which are below the water line.●EBITDA. Earnings before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization.●EPS. Loss per share.●Explorer Class Ships. Regent’s Seven Seas Explorer, Seven Seas Splendor, and Seven Seas Grandeur.●GAAP. Generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S.●Gross Cruise Cost. The sum of total cruise operating expense and marketing, general and administrative expense.●Gross Tons. A unit of enclosed passenger space on a cruise ship, such that one gross ton equals 100 cubic feet or 2.831 cubic meters.●Net Cruise Cost. Gross Cruise Cost less commissions, transportation and other expense and onboard and other expense.●Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel. Net Cruise Cost less fuel expense.●Net Yield. Adjusted Gross Margin per Capacity Day. ●Occupancy or Occupancy Percentage. The ratio of Passenger Cruise Days to Capacity Days. A percentage greater than 100% indicates that three or more passengers occupied some cabins.●Passenger Cruise Days. The number of passengers carried for the period, multiplied by the number of days in their respective cruises.●Prima Class Ships. Norwegian Prima, Norwegian Viva and four additional ships on order.●Revolving Loan Facility. $875.0 million senior secured revolving credit facility.●SEC. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.●Senior Secured Credit Facility.   The Credit Agreement, originally dated as of May 24, 2013, as amended and restated on October 31, 2014, June 6, 2016, October 10, 2017, January 2, 2019 and May 8, 2020, and as further amended on January 29, 2021, March 25, 2021, November 12, 2021 and December 6, 2022, by and among NCLC and Voyager Vessel Company, LLC, as co-borrowers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent and as collateral agent, and various lenders and agents, providing for a senior secured credit facility consisting of (i) the Revolving Loan Facility and (ii) the Term Loan A Facility. ●Shipboard Retirement Plan. An unfunded defined benefit pension plan for certain crew members which computes benefits based on years of service, subject to certain requirements.
●Term Loan A Facility.  The senior secured term loan A facility having an outstanding principal amount of approximately $0.8 billion as of March 31, 2023.
We use certain non-GAAP financial measures, such as Adjusted Gross Margin, Net Yield, Net Cruise Cost, Adjusted Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS, to enable us to analyze our performance. See “Terminology” for the definitions of these and other non-GAAP financial measures. We utilize Adjusted Gross Margin and Net Yield to manage our business on a day-to-day basis because it reflects revenue earned net of certain direct variable costs. We also utilize Net Cruise Cost and Adjusted Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel to manage our business on a day-to-day basis. In measuring our ability to control costs in a manner that positively impacts net income (loss), we believe changes in Adjusted Gross Margin, Net Yield, Net Cruise Cost and Adjusted Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel to be the most relevant indicators of our performance. Per Capacity Day data is not considered meaningful for the three months ended March 31, 2022 and is not presented herein.We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is appropriate as a supplemental financial measure as it is used by management to assess operating performance. We also believe that Adjusted EBITDA is a useful measure in determining our performance as it reflects certain operating drivers of our business, such as sales growth, operating costs, marketing, general and administrative expense and other operating income and expense. Adjusted EBITDA is not a defined term under GAAP nor is it intended to be a measure of liquidity or cash flows from operations or a measure comparable to net income (loss), as it does not take into account certain requirements such as capital expenditures and related depreciation, principal and interest payments and tax payments and it includes other supplemental adjustments.In addition, Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS are non-GAAP financial measures that exclude certain amounts and are used to supplement GAAP net loss and EPS. We use Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS as key performance measures of our earnings performance. We believe that both management and investors benefit from referring to these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing our performance and when planning, forecasting and analyzing future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures also facilitate management’s internal comparison to our historical performance. In addition, management uses Adjusted EPS as a performance measure for our incentive compensation. The amounts excluded in the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures may vary from period to period; accordingly, our presentation of Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS may not be indicative of future adjustments or results.You are encouraged to evaluate each adjustment used in calculating our non-GAAP financial measures and the reasons we consider our non-GAAP financial measures appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating our non-GAAP financial measures, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses similar to the adjustments in our presentation. Our non-GAAP financial measures have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Our presentation of our non-GAAP financial measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to other companies. Please see a historical reconciliation of these measures to the most comparable GAAP measure presented in our consolidated financial statements below in the “Results of Operations” section.
We categorize revenue from our cruise and cruise-related activities as either “passenger ticket” revenue or “onboard and other” revenue. Passenger ticket revenue and onboard and other revenue vary according to product offering, the size of the ship in operation, the length of cruises operated and the markets in which the ship operates. Our revenue is seasonal based on demand for cruises, which has historically been strongest during the Northern Hemisphere’s summer months; however, our cruise voyages were completely suspended from March 2020 until July 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and our resumption of cruise voyages was phased in gradually, with full operation of our fleet resumed in May 2022. Passenger ticket revenue primarily consists of revenue for accommodations, meals in certain restaurants on the ship, certain onboard entertainment, port fees and taxes and includes revenue for service charges and air and land transportation to and from the ship to the extent guests purchase these items from us. Onboard and other revenue
primarily consists of revenue from casino, beverage sales, shore excursions, specialty dining, retail sales, spa services and Wi-Fi services. Our onboard revenue is derived from onboard activities we perform directly or that are performed by independent concessionaires, from which we receive a share of their revenue.Our cruise operating expense is classified as follows:●Commissions, transportation and other primarily consists of direct costs associated with passenger ticket revenue. These costs include travel advisor commissions, air and land transportation expenses, related credit card fees, certain port fees and taxes and the costs associated with shore excursions and hotel accommodations included as part of the overall cruise purchase price.●Onboard and other primarily consists of direct costs incurred in connection with onboard and other revenue, including casino, beverage sales and shore excursions.●Payroll and related consists of the cost of wages and benefits for shipboard employees and costs of certain inventory items, including food, for a third party that provides crew and other hotel services for certain ships. ●Fuel includes fuel costs, the impact of certain fuel hedges and fuel delivery costs.●Food consists of food costs for passengers and crew on certain ships.●Other consists of repairs and maintenance (including Dry-dock costs), ship insurance and other ship expenses.
For a discussion of our critical accounting policies and estimates, see “Critical Accounting Policies” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” We have made no significant changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates from those described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In February 2023, NCLC issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of 8.375% senior secured notes due 2028. The proceeds from the notes were used to repay the loans outstanding under our Term Loan A Facility that otherwise would have become due in January 2024, including to pay any accrued and unpaid interest thereon, as well as related premiums, fees and expenses. In February 2023, our $1 billion commitment letter was extended through February 2024, with an option for NCLC to further extend the commitments through February 2025 at its election. Simultaneously, the amount of the commitment was reduced to $650 million, which may be drawn in up to two draws, and in connection with the execution of the amended commitment letter, NCLC issued $250 million aggregate principal amount of 9.75% senior secured notes due 2028. NCLC will use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. In February 2023, NCLC entered into a Backstop Agreement with MS, pursuant to which MS has agreed to provide backstop committed financing to refinance and/or repay in whole or in part up to $300 million of amounts outstanding under the Senior Secured Credit Facility at any time between October 4, 2023 and January 2, 2024.In April 2023, $82.5 million in aggregate principal amount of the Revolving Loan Facility that was not previously extended was assigned to a new lender under the same terms as the existing lenders who extended commitments in December 2022 under Amendment No. 4 to the Senior Secured Credit Facility.See Note 6 – “Long-Term Debt” for more information.
The Company continues to experience strong consumer demand. The cumulative booked position for the remainder of 2023 is ahead of 2019 levels inclusive of the Company’s increase in capacity, at continued higher pricing. Onboard revenue generation remains robust and the Company continues to focus on increasing its pre-sold revenue from guests prior to voyage sailing. The phased Occupancy ramp-up is expected to be complete in the second quarter of 2023.
As a result of conditions associated with global events, including the downstream effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine and actions taken by the United States and other governments in response to the invasion, the global economy, including the financial and credit markets, has experienced significant volatility and disruptions, including impacts to inflation rates, fuel prices, foreign currencies and interest rates.  Our costs have been, and are expected to continue to be, adversely impacted by these factors. We have used, and may continue to use, derivative instruments to attempt to mitigate the risk of volatility in fuel prices and interest rates. In an attempt to mitigate risks related to inflation, our supply chain department has negotiated contracts with varying terms, with a goal of providing us with the ability to take advantage of cost declines when they occur, and diversified our sourcing options. These strategies may not fully offset the impact of current macroeconomic conditions; however, cost savings from our ongoing margin enhancement initiative were realized earlier than anticipated, and as a result, we expect operating costs per capacity day to show improvement in 2023. Furthermore, we are exposed to fluctuations in the euro exchange rate for certain portions of ship construction contracts that have not been hedged. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
We believe the increasing focus on climate change, including the Company’s recently established targets for greenhouse gas reductions, and evolving regulatory requirements will materially impact our future capital expenditures and results of operations. We expect to incur significant expenses related to these regulatory requirements, which may include expenses related to greenhouse gas emissions reduction initiatives and the purchase of emissions allowances, among other things. If requirements become more stringent, we may be required to change certain operating procedures, for example slowing the speed of our ships, which could adversely impact our operations. We are evaluating the effects of global climate change related requirements, which are still evolving, including our ability to mitigate certain future expenses through initiatives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions; consequently, the full impact to the Company is not yet known. Additionally, our ships, port facilities, corporate offices and island destinations have in the past and may again be adversely affected by an increase in the frequency and intensity of adverse weather conditions caused by climate change. For example, certain ports have become temporarily unavailable to us due to hurricane damage and other destinations have either considered or implemented restrictions on cruise operations due to environmental concerns. Refer to “Impacts related to climate change may adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations” in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
●Total revenue increased to $1.8 billion compared to $521.9 million.●Net loss and diluted EPS were $(159.3) million and $(0.38), respectively, compared to $(1.0) billion and $(2.35), respectively.●Operating income was $10.7 million compared to operating loss of $(688.8) million. ●Gross margin was $360.0 million compared to $(380.1) million. Adjusted Gross Margin was $1.3 billion compared to $401.4 million.
●Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS were $(127.7) million and $(0.30), respectively, in 2023, which included $31.6 million of adjustments primarily related to share-based compensation. Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS were $(760.5) million and $(1.82), respectively, in 2022, which included $222.2 million of adjustments primarily related to losses on extinguishment and modification of debt.●Adjusted EBITDA improved 149.2% to $234.2 million compared to $(476.2) million.We refer you to our “Results of Operations” below for a calculation of Adjusted Gross Margin, Adjusted Net Loss, Adjusted EPS and Adjusted EBITDA.
The following table sets forth selected statistical information:
Adjusted Gross Margin and Net Yield were calculated as follows (in thousands, except Capacity Days and Yield data):
Gross Cruise Cost, Net Cruise Cost, Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel and Adjusted Net Cruise Cost Excluding Fuel were calculated as follows (in thousands, except Capacity Days and per Capacity Day data):
(1)Non-cash deferred compensation expenses related to the crew pension plan and other crew expenses, which are included in payroll and related expense.(2)Non-cash share-based compensation expenses related to equity awards, which are included in marketing, general and administrative expense and payroll and related expense.Adjusted Net Loss and Adjusted EPS were calculated as follows (in thousands, except share and per share data):
(1)Non-cash deferred compensation expenses related to the crew pension plan and other crew expenses, which are included in payroll and related expense and other income (expense), net.(2)Non-cash share-based compensation expenses related to equity awards, which are included in marketing, general and administrative expense and payroll and related expense.(3)Losses on extinguishment of debt and modification of debt are included in interest expense, net.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA were calculated as follows (in thousands):
(1)In 2023, primarily consists of gains and losses, net for foreign currency remeasurements. In 2022, primarily consists of gains and losses, net for fuel swaps not designated as hedges and foreign currency remeasurements.(2)Non-cash deferred compensation expenses related to the crew pension plan and other crew expenses, which are included in payroll and related expense.(3)Non-cash share-based compensation expenses related to equity awards, which are included in marketing, general and administrative expense and payroll and related expense.
Total revenue increased to $1.8 billion in 2023 compared to $521.9 million in 2022. In 2023, revenue primarily increased as a result of our return to service with 5.5 million Passenger Cruise Days compared to 1.4 million in 2022.
Total cruise operating expense increased 74.1% in 2023 compared to 2022. In 2023, our cruise operating expenses were increased due to the resumption of voyages, resulting in higher payroll, fuel, and direct variable costs of fully operating ships. Costs for certain items such as food, fuel and logistics also continue to be elevated related to inflation. In 2022, the three months started with 16 ships operating with guests onboard and ended with 23 ships in service. Gross Cruise Cost increased 56.7% in 2023 compared to 2022 primarily related to the change in costs described above. Total other operating expense increased 11.7% in 2023 compared to 2022 primarily due to an increase in marketing costs as we return to historical occupancy and prepare for three new ship deliveries in 2023. Interest expense, net was $171.3 million in 2023 compared to $327.7 million in 2022. The decrease in interest expense reflects lower losses in 2023 from extinguishment of debt and debt modification costs, which were $2.4 million in 2023 compared to $188.4 million in 2022. Excluding these losses, interest expense increased primarily as a result of higher rates.Other income (expense), net was expense of $9.0 million in 2023 compared to income of $38.1 million in 2022. In 2023, the expense primarily related to losses on foreign currency remeasurements. In 2022, the income primarily related to gains on fuel swaps not designated as hedges and foreign currency remeasurements.
Table of ContentsLiquidity and Capital ResourcesGeneralAs of March 31, 2023, our liquidity consisted of cash and cash equivalents of $700.6 million, a $591 million undrawn Revolving Loan Facility and a $650 million undrawn commitment less related fees. Our primary ongoing liquidity requirements are to finance working capital, capital expenditures and debt service.​In February 2023, NCLC issued $600 million aggregate principal amount of 8.375% senior secured notes due 2028. The proceeds from the notes were used to repay the loans outstanding under our Term Loan A Facility that otherwise would have become due in January 2024, including to pay any accrued and unpaid interest thereon, as well as related premiums, fees and expenses. ​In February 2023, our $1 billion commitment letter was extended through February 2024, with an option for NCLC to further extend the commitments through February 2025 at its election. Simultaneously, the amount of the commitment was reduced to $650 million, which may be drawn in up to two draws, and in connection with the execution of the amended commitment letter, NCLC issued $250 million aggregate principal amount of 9.75% senior secured notes due 2028. NCLC will use the net proceeds for general corporate purposes. ​In February 2023, NCLC entered into a Backstop Agreement with MS, pursuant to which MS has agreed to provide backstop committed financing to refinance and/or repay in whole or in part up to $300 million of amounts outstanding under the Senior Secured Credit Facility at any time between October 4, 2023 and January 2, 2024. ​In April 2023, $82.5 million in aggregate principal amount of the Revolving Loan Facility that was not previously extended was assigned to a new lender under the same terms as the existing lenders who extended commitments in December 2022 under Amendment No. 4 to the Senior Secured Credit Facility. See Note 6 – “Long-Term Debt” for more information on the above financing transactions.​The estimation of our future cash flow projections includes numerous assumptions that are subject to various risks and uncertainties. Refer to Note 2 – “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further information on liquidity. Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for risks and uncertainties that may cause our results to differ from our expectations.  ​There can be no assurance that the accuracy of the assumptions used to estimate our liquidity requirements will be correct, and our ability to be predictive is uncertain due to the dynamic nature of the current operating environment, including any residual impacts of the COVID-19 global pandemic, Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine and current macroeconomic conditions such as inflation, rising fuel prices and rising interest rates. Based on the liquidity estimates and our current resources, we have concluded we have sufficient liquidity to satisfy our obligations for at least the next 12 months. Within the next twelve months we will pursue refinancings in order to reduce interest expense and/or extend debt maturities. There is no assurance that cash flows from operations and additional financings will be available in the future to fund our future obligations. Beyond the next 12 months, we will pursue refinancings and other balance sheet optimization transactions in order to reduce interest expense and/or extend debt maturities. ​We have received amendments to certain financial and other debt covenants, including the modification of our free liquidity requirements. At March 31, 2023, taking into account such amendments, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants. If we do not continue to remain in compliance with our covenants, we would have to seek additional amendments to or waivers of the covenants. However, no assurances can be made that such amendments or waivers would be approved by our lenders.  Generally, if an event of default under any debt agreement occurs, then pursuant to cross default and/or cross acceleration clauses, substantially all of our outstanding debt and derivative contract payables could become due, and all debt and derivative contracts could be terminated, which would have a material adverse impact to our operations and liquidity.​Since March 2020, Moody’s has downgraded our long-term issuer rating to B2, our senior secured rating to B1 and our senior unsecured rating to Caa1. In September 2022, Moody’s reaffirmed our current ratings. Since April 2020, S&P 32Table of ContentsGlobal has downgraded our issuer credit rating to B, lowered our issue-level rating on our $875 million Revolving Loan Facility and $0.8 billion Term Loan A Facility to BB-, our issue-level rating on our other senior secured notes to B+ and our senior unsecured rating to B-. If our credit ratings were to be further downgraded, or general market conditions were to ascribe higher risk to our rating levels, our industry, or us, our access to capital and the cost of any debt or equity financing will be further negatively impacted. We also have capacity to incur additional indebtedness under our debt agreements and may issue additional ordinary shares from time to time, subject to our authorized number of ordinary shares. However, there is no guarantee that debt or equity financings will be available in the future to fund our obligations, or that they will be available on terms consistent with our expectations.​As of March 31, 2023, we had advance ticket sales of $3.4 billion, including the long-term portion, which included approximately $100.0 million of future cruise credits. We also have agreements with our credit card processors that, as of March 31, 2023, governed approximately $3.1 billion in advance ticket sales that had been received by the Company relating to future voyages. These agreements allow the credit card processors to require under certain circumstances, including the existence of a material adverse change, excessive chargebacks and other triggering events, that the Company maintain a reserve which would be satisfied by posting collateral. Although the agreements vary, these requirements may generally be satisfied either through a percentage of customer payments withheld or providing cash funds directly to the card processor. Any cash reserve or collateral requested could be increased or decreased. As of March 31, 2023, we had cash collateral reserves of approximately $577.6 million with credit card processors, of which approximately $77.3 million is recognized in accounts receivable, net and approximately $500.3 million in other long-term assets. We may be required to pledge additional collateral and/or post additional cash reserves or take other actions that may adversely affect our liquidity.​Sources and Uses of Cash In this section, references to “2023” refer to the three months ended March 31, 2023 and references to “2022” refer to the three months ended March 31, 2022.Net cash provided by operating activities was $503.3 million in 2023 as compared to net cash used in operating activities of $371.0 million in 2022. The net cash provided by operating activities included net losses and timing differences in cash receipts and payments relating to operating assets and liabilities. Advance ticket sales increased by $668.3 million in 2023 and by $417.9 million in 2022. The net losses also include losses on extinguishment of debt of $188.4 million in 2022.Net cash used in investing activities was $236.4 million in 2023 and net cash provided by investing activities was $79.7 million in 2022. The net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to newbuild payments in 2023. The net cash provided by investing activities was primarily related to maturities of short-term investments partially offset by newbuild payments and ship improvement projects in 2022.Net cash used in financing activities was $513.4 million in 2023 primarily due debt repayments and a net decrease in our Revolving Loan Facility partially offset by the proceeds of $850 million from our various note offerings. Net cash provided by financing activities was $921.5 million in 2022 primarily due to the proceeds of $2.1 billion from our various note offerings partially offset by debt repayments and related redemption premiums associated with extinguishment of certain senior secured notes.Future Capital Commitments Future capital commitments consist of contracted commitments, including ship construction contracts. Anticipated expenditures related to ship construction contracts were $2.4 billion for the remainder of 2023, including Oceania Cruises’ Vista, and $0.4 billion and $1.9 billion for the years ending December 31, 2024 and 2025, respectively, reflecting delays in certain scheduled ship delivery dates. The Company has export credit financing in place for the anticipated expenditures related to ship construction contracts of $2.0 billion for the remainder of 2023 and $0.2 billion and $1.5 billion for the years ending December 31, 2024 and 2025, respectively. This financing includes increases in the Company’s export-credit agency backed commitments of approximately €1.7 billion through 2028 to finance improvements, changes and modifications to certain newbuilds, owners’ supplies associated with preparing these ships 33
to enter service and related financing premiums. These changes include the modification and enlargement of the last four Prima Class Ships, which will increase gross tonnage by up to 20% compared to the Norwegian Prima and Norwegian Viva. The modifications for the last two Prima Class Ships also include changes to accommodate the use of methanol as an alternative fuel source in the future, reinforcing our commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Anticipated non-newbuild capital expenditures for the remainder of 2023 are approximately $0.3 billion. Future expected capital expenditures will significantly increase our depreciation and amortization expense.For the Oceania Cruises brand, the first Allura Class Ship, Oceania Cruises’ Vista, at approximately 67,000 Gross Tons and with 1,200 Berths, was delivered in April 2023. For the Norwegian brand, we have five Prima Class Ships on order, each ranging from approximately 143,500 to 169,000 Gross Tons with 3,100 or more Berths, with currently scheduled delivery dates from 2023 through 2028. For the Regent brand, we have an order for one Explorer Class Ship to be delivered in 2023, which will be approximately 55,000 Gross Tons and 750 Berths. For the Oceania Cruises brand, we have an order for one additional Allura Class Ship to be delivered in 2025, which will be approximately 67,000 Gross Tons and 1,200 Berths. The impacts of COVID-19 on the shipyards where our ships are under construction (or will be constructed), Russia’s ongoing invasion of Ukraine, initiatives to improve environmental sustainability and modifications the Company plans to make to its newbuilds and/or other macroeconomic events have resulted in delays in expected ship deliveries. These and other impacts could result in additional delays in ship deliveries in the future, which may be prolonged.As of March 31, 2023, the combined contract prices of the eight ships on order for delivery, including Oceania Cruises’ Vista, was approximately €7.0 billion, or $7.6 billion based on the euro/U.S. dollar exchange rate as of March 31, 2023. We have obtained export credit financing which is expected to fund approximately 80% of the contract price of each ship and related financing premiums, subject to certain conditions. We do not anticipate any contractual breaches or cancellations to occur. However, if any such events were to occur, it could result in, among other things, the forfeiture of prior deposits or payments made by us and potential claims and impairment losses which may materially impact our business, financial condition and results of operations. Capitalized interest for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $14.7 million and $13.3 million, respectively, primarily associated with the construction of our newbuild ships.
As of March 31, 2023, our material cash requirements for debt and ship construction were as follows (in thousands):
(1)Includes principal as well as estimated interest payments with LIBOR/Term SOFR held constant as of March 31, 2023. Includes exchangeable notes which can be settled in shares. Excludes the impact of any future possible refinancings and undrawn export-credit backed facilities. (2)Ship construction contracts are for our newbuild ships based on the euro/U.S. dollar exchange rate as of March 31, 2023. As of March 31, 2023, we have committed undrawn export-credit backed facilities of approximately $5.6 billion which funds approximately 80% of our ship construction contracts. After giving effect to amendments of our newbuild agreements subsequent to March 31, 2023, our material cash requirements for ship construction contracts are as follows (in thousands):
Certain of our debt agreements contain covenants that, among other things, require us to maintain a minimum level of liquidity, as well as limit our net funded debt-to-capital ratio and maintain certain other ratios. Substantially all of our ships and certain other assets are pledged as collateral for certain of our debt. We have received amendments to certain financial and other debt covenants, including the modification of our free liquidity requirements. After taking into account such amendments, we believe we were in compliance with these covenants as of March 31, 2023.In addition, our existing debt agreements restrict, and any of our future debt arrangements may restrict, among other things, the ability of our subsidiaries, including NCLC, to make distributions and/or pay dividends to NCLH and NCLH’s ability to pay cash dividends to its shareholders. NCLH is a holding company and depends upon its subsidiaries for their ability to pay distributions to it to finance any dividend or pay any other obligations of NCLH. However, we do not believe that these restrictions have had or are expected to have an impact on our ability to meet any cash obligations.We believe our cash on hand, the impact of the undrawn commitment less related fees, the backstop financing available from October 4, 2023 through January 2, 2024, the expected return of a portion of the cash collateral from our credit card processors, expected future operating cash inflows and our ability to issue debt securities or additional equity securities, will be sufficient to fund operations, debt payment requirements, capital expenditures and maintain compliance with covenants under our debt agreements over the next 12-month period. Refer to “—Liquidity and Capital Resources—General” for further information regarding the debt covenant waivers and liquidity requirements.
Certain service providers may require collateral in the normal course of our business. The amount of collateral may change based on certain terms and conditions. As a routine part of our business, depending on market conditions, exchange rates, pricing and our strategy for growth, we regularly consider opportunities to enter into contracts for the building of additional ships. We may also consider the sale of ships, potential acquisitions and strategic alliances. If any of these transactions were to occur, they may be financed through the incurrence of additional permitted indebtedness, through cash flows from operations, or through the issuance of debt, equity or equity-related securities.We refer you to “—Liquidity and Capital Resources—General” for information regarding collateral provided to our credit card processors.