
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of Newmont Corporation, a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries (collectively, “Newmont,” the “Company,” “our” and “we”). Please see Non-GAAP Financial Measures within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis for the non-GAAP financial measures used in this MD&A by the Company. This item should be read in conjunction with our interim unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and the notes thereto included in this quarterly report. Additionally, the following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Consolidated Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023.
Newmont is the world’s leading gold company and is the only gold company included in the S&P 500 Index and the Fortune 500 list of companies. We have been included in the Dow Jones Sustainability Index-World since 2007 and have adopted the World Gold Council’s Conflict-Free Gold Policy. Since 2015, Newmont has been ranked as the mining and metal sector's top gold miner by the S&P Global Corporate Sustainability Assessment. Newmont was ranked the top miner in 3BL Media’s 100 Best Corporate Citizens list which ranks the 1,000 largest publicly traded U.S. companies on ESG transparency and performance since 2020. We are primarily engaged in the exploration for and acquisition of gold properties, some of which may contain copper, silver, lead, zinc or other metals. We have significant operations and/or assets in the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Dominican Republic, Peru, Suriname, Argentina, Chile, Australia, and Ghana.Refer to the discussion of Risk and Uncertainties within Note 2 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements as well as the Consolidated Financial Results, Results of Consolidated Operations, Liquidity and Capital Resources and Non-GAAP Financial Measures sections presented below, for information about the continued impacts from the geopolitical and macroeconomic pressures including recent turmoil in the banking sector, inflation, effects of certain countermeasures taken by central banks, and the potential for further supply chain disruptions relating to the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as an uncertain and evolving labor market. In January 2023, the Company reevaluated its segments to reflect certain changes in the financial information regularly reviewed by the CODM and determined that its reportable segments were each of its 12 mining operations and its 38.5% interest in Nevada Gold Mines ("NGM"), which is accounted for using the proportionate consolidation method. Segment results for the prior periods have been recast to reflect the change in reportable segments. Refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.In the third quarter of 2022, the Company announced the delay of the full-funds investment decision for the Yanacocha Sulfides project in Peru. With the delay of the Yanacocha Sulfides project, management will focus its efforts on optimizing its allocation of funds to current operations and other capital commitments, while continuing to assess execution and project plan options, up to and including transitioning Yanacocha operations into full closure. Refer to Note 2 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.In February 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Buenaventura's 43.65% noncontrolling interest in Minera Yanacocha S.R.L. ("Yanacocha") (the "Yanacocha Transaction") and sold its 46.94% ownership interest in Minera La Zanja S.R.L. ("La Zanja"). Additionally, in March 2022, Sumitomo exercised its option to require Yanacocha to repurchase its 5% interest which closed in the second quarter of 2022, resulting in the Company obtaining 100% ownership interest in Yanacocha. Refer to Note 1 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further details regarding these transactions.We continue to focus on improving safety and efficiency at our operations, maintaining leading ESG practices, and sustaining our global portfolio of longer-life, lower cost mines to generate the financial flexibility we need to strategically reinvest in the business, strengthen the Company’s investment-grade balance sheet and return cash to shareholders.
The details of our Net income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to Newmont stockholders are set forth below:
The decrease in Net income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to Newmont stockholders for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to a decrease in Sales resulting from lower average realized prices for all metals except gold and lower sales volumes for all metals except copper, largely as a result of (i) lower ore grade milled and lower mill recovery at Peñasquito; and (ii) lower production at Tanami due to significant rainfall and flooding in the Northern Territory and surrounding areas in early 2023, which resulted in transportation route closures into the mine ("Tanami rainfall event"). As a result, processing operations were paused for the majority of February 2023. During this time, mining operations continued and ore was stockpiled and in late February, transportation routes were reopened, and processing operations were resumed. The Company is working with its insurers related to the business interruption that resulted from this event.Additionally, the decrease in Net income (loss) from continuing operations attributable to Newmont stockholders is also the result of higher Costs applicable to sales predominately resulting from cost inflation impacts, partially offset by a non-cash pension settlement charge recognized in 2022, lower Depreciation and amortization, and the net gain recognized on the sale of the Triple Flag Precious Metals Corporation ("Triple Flag") investment, acquired during the first quarter of 2023 in exchange for the previously held Maverix Metals Inc. ("Maverix") investment, compared to the loss on the sale of the La Zanja equity method investment in 2022. The details and analyses of our Sales for all periods presented are set forth below. Refer to Note 4 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
(1)Per ounce/pound measures may not recalculate due to rounding.
(1)Per ounce/pound measures may not recalculate due to rounding.The change in consolidated sales is due to:
For discussion regarding drivers impacting sales volumes by site, see Results of Consolidated Operations below.The details of our Costs applicable to sales are set forth below. Refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
The increase in Costs applicable to sales during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to impacts arising from the significant inflation experienced globally including increases in labor, materials, and maintenance costs, supply chain disruption and higher energy prices, partially offset by an increase in finished goods inventory and buildup of stockpile inventory at Peñasquito compared to a draw-down of stockpile inventory in 2022 and lower sales volumes.For discussion regarding other significant drivers impacting Costs applicable to sales by site, see Results of Consolidated Operations below.The details of our Depreciation and amortization are set forth below. Refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
The decrease to Depreciation and amortization during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to the (i) lower production volume at NGM as a result of the ramp down of mining at Long Canyon, lower leach pad production, and lower ore grade mined and (ii) lower sales and production volume at Peñasquito as a result of an increase in finished goods inventory and a buildup of stockpile inventory compared to a draw-down in 2022 and lower ore grade mined.For discussion regarding other significant drivers impacting Depreciation and amortization by site, see Results of Consolidated Operations below.For discussion regarding variations in operations, see Results of Operations below.Income and mining tax expense (benefit) was $213 and $214 during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The effective tax rate is driven by a number of factors and the comparability of our income tax expense for the reported periods will be primarily affected by (i) variations in our income before income taxes; (ii) geographic distribution of that income; (iii) impacts of the changes in tax law; (iv) valuation allowances on tax assets; (v) percentage depletion; (vi) fluctuation in the value of the USD and foreign currencies; and (vii) the impact of specific transactions and assessments. As a result, the effective tax rate will fluctuate, sometimes significantly, year to year. This trend is expected to continue in future periods. Refer to Note 8 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of income taxes.
(1)Represents income (loss) from continuing operations by geographic location before income taxes and equity income (loss) of affiliates. These amounts will not reconcile to the Segment Information for the reasons stated in Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.(2)In accordance with applicable accounting rules, the interim provision for income taxes is adjusted to equal the consolidated tax rate.(3)The consolidated effective income tax rate is a function of the combined effective tax rates for the jurisdictions in which we operate. Variations in the relative proportions of jurisdictional income could result in fluctuations to our combined effective income tax rate.In August 2022, the U.S. government enacted the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 (the "IRA") into law. The IRA introduced an excise tax on stock repurchases of 1% and a corporate alternative minimum tax (the "Corporate AMT") of 15% on the adjusted financial statement income ("AFSI") of corporations with average AFSI exceeding $1 billion over a three-year period. The IRA is effective for fiscal periods beginning 2023. While waiting on pending Department of Treasury regulatory guidance, we are continuing to monitor developments. Based upon information known to date, the IRA has no material impact in the current consolidated financial statements, disclosures, or cash flows. Further, it is not anticipated to have a material impact to future consolidated financial statements, disclosures, or cash flows. Refer to Note 2 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Newmont has developed gold equivalent ounces ("GEO") metrics to provide a comparable basis for analysis and understanding of our operations and performance related to copper, silver, lead and zinc. Gold equivalent ounces are calculated as pounds or ounces produced or sold multiplied by the ratio of the other metals’ price to the gold price, using the metal prices in the table below:
(1)Excludes Depreciation and amortization and Reclamation and remediation. (2)All-in sustaining costs is a non-GAAP financial measure. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis.(3)All-in sustaining costs and Depreciation and amortization include expenses for Corporate and Other.(4)The Company acquired the remaining interest in Yanacocha in the second quarter of 2022, resulting in 100% ownership. The Company recognized amounts attributable to non-controlling interests for Yanacocha during the three months ended March 31, 2022 for the period prior to acquiring 100% ownership. Refer to Note 1 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statement for further information. (5)For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Peñasquito mine produced 7,463 thousand ounces of silver, 41 million pounds of lead and 102 million pounds of zinc. For the three months ended March 31, 2022, the Peñasquito mine produced 8,080 thousand ounces of silver, 44 million pounds of lead and 114 million pounds of zinc.(6)For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, Boddington produced 26 million and 19 million pounds of copper, respectively.(7)Income and expenses of equity method investments are included in Equity income (loss) of affiliates. Refer to Note 10 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our equity method investments.
CC&V, USA. Gold production increased 37% primarily due to higher leach pad recoveries. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce decreased 26% primarily due to higher gold ounces sold and no inventory write-downs in the current year compared to inventory write-downs in the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce decreased 66% primarily due to a lower depreciable asset base as a result of the impairment charge recognized during the fourth quarter of 2022. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce decreased 18% primarily due to lower costs applicable to sales per gold ounce, partially offset by higher sustaining capital spend.Musselwhite, Canada. Gold production increased 28% primarily due to higher mill throughput. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce was generally in line with the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce decreased 15% primarily due to higher gold ounces sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce were generally in line with the prior year.Porcupine, Canada. Gold production increased 12% primarily due to higher ore grade milled partially offset by lower mill throughput. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce was generally in line with the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce increased 22% primarily due to higher depreciation rates as a result of higher gold ounces mined, partially offset by higher gold ounces sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 9% primarily due to higher reclamation costs, higher advanced project and exploration costs and higher sustaining capital spend.Éléonore, Canada. Gold production increased 43% primarily due to higher mill throughput and higher ore grade milled. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce decreased 12% primarily due to higher gold ounces sold, partially offset by higher maintenance costs for underground equipment and higher materials and contract labor costs. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce decreased 31% primarily due to higher gold ounces sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce decreased 9% primarily due to lower costs applicable to sales per gold ounce, partially offset by higher sustaining capital spend.Peñasquito, Mexico. Gold production decreased 38% primarily due to lower mill recovery and lower ore grade milled. Gold equivalent ounces – other metals production decreased 25% primarily due to a change in GEO pricing, noted above, that had an unfavorable impact to the calculated gold equivalent ounces - other metals produced of 17%, and lower other metals produced of 8%, as a result of lower mill recovery, partially offset by higher ore grade milled. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 84% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold, higher materials costs and higher workers' participation costs due to the Peñasquito profit-sharing agreement entered into during the second quarter of 2022. Costs applicable to sales per gold equivalent ounce – other metals increased 37% primarily due to lower gold equivalent ounces - other metals sold, higher materials costs and higher workers' participation costs due to the Peñasquito profit-sharing agreement entered into by the Company during the second quarter of 2022. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce increased 26% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold, partially offset by lower depreciation rates as a result of lower gold ounces mined. Depreciation and amortization per gold equivalent ounces – other metals decreased 6% primarily due to lower depreciation rates as a result of lower gold equivalent ounces - other metals mined, partially offset by lower gold equivalent ounces - other metals sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 83% primarily due to higher costs applicable to sales per gold ounce. All-in sustaining costs per gold equivalent ounce – other metals increased 42% primarily due to higher costs applicable to sales per gold equivalent ounce - other metals and higher sustaining capital spend.Merian, Suriname. Gold production decreased 19% primarily due to lower ore grade milled and lower mill throughput. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 22% primarily due to higher equipment maintenance costs, higher materials, fuel and energy costs resulting from cost inflation and lower gold ounces sold, partially offset by no inventory write-downs in the current year compared to inventory write-downs in the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce was generally in line with the prior year. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 25% primarily due to higher costs applicable to sales per gold ounce and higher sustaining capital spend.Cerro Negro, Argentina. Gold production was generally in line with the prior year. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 18% primarily due to higher equipment maintenance costs, higher materials and contracted service costs resulting from cost inflation and lower gold ounces sold. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce decreased 16% primarily due to lower depreciation rates as a result of lower gold ounces mined. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 10% primarily due higher costs applicable to sales per gold ounce.Yanacocha, Peru. Gold production decreased 14% primarily due to lower leach pad recoveries. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 8% primarily due to higher contracted service, energy and materials costs resulting from cost inflation and lower gold ounces sold. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce decreased 19% primarily due to lower depreciation rates as a result of lower gold ounces mined. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 15% primarily due to higher costs applicable to sales per gold ounce and higher advanced project and exploration costs.Boddington, Australia. Gold production increased 9% primarily due to higher mill throughput and higher mill recovery. Gold equivalent ounces – other metals production increased 25% primarily due to higher other metals produced of 35% as a result of higher ore grade milled, partially offset by a change in GEO pricing, noted above, that had an unfavorable impact to the calculated gold equivalent ounces - other metals produced of 10%. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce was generally in line with the prior year. Costs applicable to sales per gold equivalent ounce – other metals was generally in line with the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce was generally in line with the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold equivalent ounce – other metals decreased 5% primarily due to higher gold equivalent ounces - other metals sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 11% primarily due to higher sustaining capital spend. All-in sustaining costs per gold equivalent ounce – other metals increased 6% primarily due to higher sustaining capital costs, partially offset by higher gold equivalent ounces - other metals sold.Tanami, Australia. Gold production decreased 37% primarily due to the Tanami rainfall event. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 42% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold and higher underground mining and maintenance costs. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce increased 33% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 20% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold partially offset by lower sustaining capital spend.Ahafo, Ghana. Gold production increased 20% primarily due to higher ore grade milled, partially offset by lower mill throughput. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce were generally in line with the prior year. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce was generally in line with the prior year. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 12% primarily due to higher sustaining capital spend, partially offset by higher gold ounces sold. In February, there was a conveyor failure from one of the primary crusher conveyors that feed the mill stockpile. The site is re-routing ore to the mill in order to minimize impacts to production and developing plans to re-build the conveyor, which it expects to commission later this year. The Company is working with its insurers and expects available insurance proceeds to substantially cover the costs of the conveyor rebuild.Akyem, Ghana. Gold production decreased 22% primarily due to lower ore grade milled, a lower drawdown of in-circuit inventory compared to the prior year and lower mill throughput. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 10% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold and higher materials and contracted service costs resulting from cost inflation. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce increased 13% primarily due to lower gold ounces sold. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 13% primarily due to higher costs applicable to sales per gold ounce and higher reclamation costs.Nevada Gold Mines, USA. Attributable gold production decreased 9% primarily due to lower mill throughput at Carlin and Cortez, lower leach pad production at Long Canyon due to the ramp down of mining and lower ore grade milled at Turquoise Ridge, partially offset by higher ore grade milled at Carlin and Cortez, higher mill throughput at Turquoise Ridge and higher mill recovery at Carlin. Costs applicable to sales per gold ounce increased 23% primarily due to higher maintenance costs, higher energy costs due to cost inflation and lower gold ounces sold at Carlin and Long Canyon, partially offset by higher gold ounces sold at Cortez and Turquoise Ridge. Depreciation and amortization per gold ounce decreased 6% primarily due to higher gold ounces sold at Turquoise Ridge and Cortez. All-in sustaining costs per gold ounce increased 29% primarily due to higher costs applicable to sales per gold ounce at Carlin, Phoenix and Long Canyon, as well as higher sustaining capital spend at Carlin and Cortez.Pueblo Viejo, Dominican Republic. Attributable gold production decreased 13% primarily due to lower ore grade milled and lower mill throughput. Refer to Note 10 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of our equity method investments.
Our foreign operations sell their gold, copper, silver, lead and zinc production based on USD metal prices. Therefore, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates do not have a material impact on our revenue. Despite selling gold and silver in London, we have no exposure to the euro or the British pound.Foreign currency exchange rates can increase or decrease profits to the extent costs are paid in foreign currencies, including the Australian dollar, the Canadian dollar, the Mexican peso, the Argentine peso, the Peruvian sol, the Surinamese dollar, and the Ghanaian cedi. Approximately 49% of Costs applicable to sales were paid in currencies other than the USD during the three months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, as follows:
Variations in the local currency exchange rates in relation to the USD at our foreign mining operations decreased Costs applicable to sales by $68 per ounce during the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same periods in 2022, primarily in Argentina, Canada, and Australia.Our Cerro Negro mine, located in Argentina, is a USD functional currency entity. Argentina is a hyperinflationary economy with a cumulative inflation rate of over 216% for the last three years. In recent years, Argentina’s central bank enacted a number of foreign currency controls in an effort to stabilize the local currency, including requiring the Company to convert USD proceeds from metal sales to local currency within 60 days from shipment date or five business days from receipt of cash, whichever happens first, as well as restricting payments to foreign-related entities denominated in foreign currency, such as dividends or distributions to the parent and related companies and royalties and other payments to foreign beneficiaries. These restrictions directly impact Cerro Negro's ability to pay principal portions of intercompany debt to the Company. We continue to monitor the foreign currency exposure risk and the limitations of repatriating cash to the U.S. Currently, these currency controls are not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements or disclosures.Our Merian mine, located in the country of Suriname, is a USD functional currency entity. Suriname has experienced significant inflation over the last three years and is a highly inflationary economy. In 2021, the Central Bank took steps to stabilize the local currency, while the government introduced new legislation to narrow the gap between government revenues and spending. The measures to increase government revenue mainly consist of tax increases; however, Newmont and the Republic of Suriname have a Mineral Agreement in place that supersedes such measures. Despite steps taken by the Central Bank, the Surinamese Dollar has continued to devalue. The majority of Merian’s activity has historically been denominated in USD; as a result, the devaluation or depreciation of the Surinamese dollar has resulted in an immaterial impact on our financial statements. Therefore, future devaluation or depreciation of the Surinamese dollar is not expected to have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements or disclosures.
We have a disciplined capital allocation strategy of maintaining financial flexibility to execute our capital priorities and generate long-term value for our shareholders. Consistent with that strategy, we aim to self-fund development projects and make strategic partnerships focused on profitable growth, while reducing our debt and returning cash to stockholders through dividends and share repurchases.The Company continues to experience the impacts from geopolitical and macroeconomic pressures. With the resulting volatile environment, the Company continues to monitor inflationary conditions, as well as the effects of certain countermeasures taken by central banks, and the potential for further supply chain disruptions, as well as an uncertain and evolving labor market. Depending on the duration and extent of the impact of these events, or changes in commodity prices, the prices for gold and other metals, and foreign exchange rates, we could continue to experience volatility; transportation industry disruptions could continue, including limitations on shipping produced metals; our supply chain could continue to experience disruption; cost inflation rates could further increase; or we could incur credit related losses of certain financial assets, which could materially impact the Company’s results of operations, cash flows and financial condition.In early 2023, the banking industry experienced adversity in which certain banks encountered failures, take-overs, and entrance into receivership or insolvency, amongst other events. Further instability in the banking system could put the liquidity of Newmont and third parties with which we do business at risk. The Company maintains strict adherence to its cash investment policies which focus on highly rated investments and capital preservation mechanisms to achieve the Company’s strategic objectives.As of March 31, 2023, we believe our available liquidity allows us to manage the short- and, possibly, long-term material adverse impacts of these events on our business. Refer to Note 2 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion on risks and uncertainties.At March 31, 2023, the Company had $2,657 in Cash and cash equivalents. The majority of our cash and cash equivalents are invested in a variety of highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less. At March 31, 2023, the Company had $797 in time deposits with a maturity of more than three months but less than one year, which are included in Time deposits and other investments. Our Cash and cash equivalents and time deposits are highly liquid and low-risk investments that are available to fund our operations as necessary. We may have investments in prime money market funds that are classified as cash and cash equivalents; however, we continually monitor the need for reclassification under the SEC requirements for money market funds, and the potential that the shares of such funds could have a net asset value of less than their par value. We believe that our liquidity and capital resources are adequate to fund our operations and corporate activities.At March 31, 2023, $915 of Cash and cash equivalents was held in foreign subsidiaries and is primarily held in USD denominated accounts with the remainder in foreign currencies readily convertible to USD. Cash and cash equivalents denominated in Argentine peso are subject to regulatory restrictions. Refer to Foreign Currency Exchange Rates above for further information. At March 31, 2023, $559 in consolidated cash and cash equivalents was held at certain foreign subsidiaries that, if repatriated, may be subject to withholding taxes. We expect that there would be no additional tax burden upon repatriation after considering the cash cost associated with the withholding taxes. We believe our existing consolidated Cash and cash equivalents, time deposits, available capacity on our revolving credit facility, and cash generated from continuing operations will be adequate to satisfy working capital needs, fund future growth, meet debt obligations and meet other liquidity requirements for the foreseeable future. At March 31, 2023, our borrowing capacity on our revolving credit facility was $3,000 and we had no borrowings outstanding. We continue to remain compliant with covenants and do not currently anticipate any events or circumstances that would impact our ability to access funds available on this facility.
Our financial position was as follows:
(1)Time deposits are included within Time deposits and other investments on the Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. Refer to Note 10 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. (2)Net debt is a non-GAAP financial measure used by management to evaluate financial flexibility and strength of the Company's balance sheet. See Non-GAAP Financial Measures within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis.
Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities of continuing operations was $481 during the three months ended March 31, 2023, a decrease in cash provided of $208 from the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to a decrease in sales resulting from lower sales volumes for all metals except for copper and lower average realized prices for all metals except for gold, an increase in operating cash expenditures resulting from the impacts arising from the significant inflation experienced globally, and a buildup of inventory compared to the same period in 2022, primarily at Peñasquito, partially offset by a decrease in tax payments.Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities was $(342) during the three months ended March 31, 2023, a decrease in cash used of $177 from the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to the sale of the Triple Flag investment in 2023, the payment to Buenaventura relating to the sale of the La Zanja equity method investment in 2022, and higher net maturities of time deposits in 2023, partially offset by higher capital expenditures in 2023.Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities was $(350) during the three months ended March 31, 2023, a decrease in cash used of $545 from the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to the acquisition of noncontrolling interest in Yanacocha in 2022, lower dividend payments in 2023, and higher net repayments of debt in 2022.
In April 2023, the Board declared a dividend of $0.40 per share, determined under the dividend framework. This framework is non-binding and is periodically reviewed and reassessed by the Board of Directors. The declaration and payment of future dividends remains at the full discretion of the Board and will depend on the Company’s financial results, cash requirements, future prospects and other factors deemed relevant by the Board.
Cash generated from operations is used to execute our capital priorities, which include sustaining and developing our global portfolio of long-lived assets. Our near-term development capital projects include Tanami Expansion 2 and Ahafo North, which are being funded from existing liquidity and will continue to be funded from future operating cash flows.We consider sustaining capital as those capital expenditures that are necessary to maintain current production and execute the current mine plan. Capital expenditures to develop new operations or related to projects at existing operations, where these projects will enhance production or reserves, are considered non-sustaining or development capital. The Company’s decision to reprioritize, sell or abandon a development project, which may include returning mining concessions to host governments, could result in a future impairment charge.Additionally, as part of our ESG initiatives, in November 2021, Newmont announced a strategic alliance with CAT and pledged a preliminary investment of $100 with the aim to develop and implement a comprehensive all-electric autonomous mining system to achieve zero emissions mining. Newmont has paid $39, all of which occurred in 2022, and the remaining pledged amount is anticipated to be paid as certain milestones are reached through 2025. Payments are recognized in Advanced projects, research and development within our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations.Other investments supporting our climate change initiatives are expected to include emissions reduction projects and renewable energy opportunities as we seek to achieve these climate targets. For risks related to climate-related capital expenditures, see Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023.For additional information on our capital expenditures, refer to Part II, Item 7, Liquidity and Capital Resources of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023.For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we had Additions to property, plant and mine development as follows:
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, development capital projects primarily included Pamour at Porcupine, Cerro Negro expansion projects, Yanacocha Sulfides, Tanami Expansion 2, Ahafo North, and Goldrush Complex at NGM. Development capital costs (excluding capitalized interest) on our Ahafo North project since approval were $254, of which $42 related to the three months ended March 31, 2023. Development capital costs (excluding capitalized interest) on our Tanami Expansion 2 project since approval were $551, of which $52 related to the three months ended March 31, 2023.For the three months ended March 31, 2022, development capital projects primarily included Pamour at Porcupine, Yanacocha Sulfides, Cerro Negro expansion projects, Tanami Expansion 2, Ahafo North, and Goldrush Complex at NGM.Sustaining capital includes capital expenditures such as underground and surface mine development, tailings facility construction, mining equipment, capitalized component purchases and water treatment plant construction.Refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 2, Non-GAAP Financial Measures, "All-In Sustaining Costs" for further information.
Debt and Corporate Revolving Credit Facilities. There were no material changes to our debt and corporate revolving credit facilities since December 31, 2022. Refer to Part II, Item 7 of our Annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, for information regarding our debt and corporate revolving credit facilities.In April 2023, the Company entered into an agreement (the “Second Amendment”) to amend certain terms of the existing $3,000 revolving credit agreement dated April 4, 2019, as amended by the first amendment dated as of March 30, 2021. The Second Amendment provides for the replacement of LIBOR-based rates with SOFR-based rates. Debt covenants under the Second Amendment are substantially the same as the existing credit agreement.Debt Covenants. There were no material changes to our debt covenants. Refer to Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, for information regarding our debt covenants. At March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all existing debt covenants and provisions related to potential defaults.Supplemental Guarantor Information. The Company filed a shelf registration statement with the SEC on Form S-3 under the Securities Act, as amended, which enables us to issue an indeterminate number or amount of common stock, preferred stock, depository shares, debt securities, guarantees of debt securities, warrants and units (the “Shelf Registration Statement”). Under the Shelf Registration Statement, our debt securities may be guaranteed by Newmont USA Limited (“Newmont USA”), one of our consolidated subsidiaries (Newmont, as issuer, and Newmont USA, as guarantor, are collectively referred to here-within as the “Obligor Group”). These guarantees are full and unconditional, and none of our other subsidiaries guarantee any security issued and outstanding. The cash provided by operations of the Obligor Group, and all of its subsidiaries, is available to satisfy debt repayments as they become due, and there are no material restrictions on the ability of the Obligor Group to obtain funds from subsidiaries by dividend, loan, or otherwise, except to the extent of any rights of noncontrolling interests or regulatory restrictions limiting repatriation of cash. Net assets attributable to noncontrolling interests were $182 and $179 at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. All noncontrolling interests relate to non-guarantor subsidiaries. For further information on our noncontrolling interests, refer to Note 1 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.Newmont and Newmont USA are primarily holding companies with no material operations, sources of income or assets other than equity interest in their subsidiaries and intercompany receivables or payables. Newmont USA’s primary investments are comprised of its 100% interest in Yanacocha and its 38.5% interest in NGM. For further information regarding these and our other operations, refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and Part I, Item 2, Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Results of Consolidated Operations.In addition to equity interests in subsidiaries, the Obligor Group’s balance sheets consisted primarily of the following intercompany assets, intercompany liabilities and external debt. The remaining assets and liabilities of the Obligor Group are considered immaterial at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022.
Newmont USA's subsidiary guarantees (the “subsidiary guarantees”) are general unsecured senior obligations of Newmont USA and rank equal in right of payment to all of Newmont USA's existing and future senior unsecured indebtedness and senior in right of payment to all of Newmont USA's future subordinated indebtedness. The subsidiary guarantees are effectively junior to any secured indebtedness of Newmont USA to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness.At March 31, 2023, Newmont USA had approximately $5,566 of consolidated indebtedness (including guaranteed debt), all of which relates to the guarantees of indebtedness of Newmont.Under the terms of the subsidiary guarantees, holders of Newmont’s securities subject to such subsidiary guarantees will not be required to exercise their remedies against Newmont before they proceed directly against Newmont USA.Newmont USA will be released and relieved from all its obligations under the subsidiary guarantees in certain specified circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following:•upon the sale or other disposition (including by way of consolidation or merger), in one transaction or a series of related transactions, of a majority of the total voting power of the capital stock or other interests of Newmont USA (other than to Newmont or any of Newmont’s affiliates);•upon the sale or disposition of all or substantially all the assets of Newmont USA (other than to Newmont or any of Newmont’s affiliates); or•upon such time as Newmont USA ceases to guarantee more than $75 aggregate principal amount of Newmont’s debt (at March 31, 2023, Newmont USA guaranteed $600 aggregate principal amount of debt of Newmont that did not contain a similar fall-away provision).Newmont’s debt securities are effectively junior to any secured indebtedness of Newmont to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness, and structurally subordinated to all debt and other liabilities of Newmont’s non-guarantor subsidiaries. At March 31, 2023, (i) Newmont’s total consolidated indebtedness was approximately $6,119, none of which was secured (other than $547 of Lease and other financing obligations), and (ii) Newmont’s non-guarantor subsidiaries had $4,304 of total liabilities (including trade payables, but excluding intercompany and external debt and reclamation and remediation liabilities), which would have been structurally senior to Newmont’s debt securities.For further information on our debt, refer to Note 13 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
As of March 31, 2023, there have been no material changes, outside the ordinary course of business, in our contractual obligations since December 31, 2022. Refer to Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023, for information regarding our contractual obligations.
Our mining and exploration activities are subject to various federal and state laws and regulations governing the protection of the environment. We have made, and expect to make in the future, expenditures to comply with such laws and regulations, but cannot predict the full amount of such future expenditures. We perform a comprehensive review of our reclamation and remediation liabilities annually and review changes in facts and circumstances associated with these obligations at least quarterly.For a complete discussion of the factors that influence our reclamation obligations and the associated risks, refer to Part II, Item 7, Managements’ Discussion and Analysis of Consolidated Financial Condition and Results of Operations under the headings Environmental and “Critical Accounting Estimates” and refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors under the heading “Mine closure, reclamation and remediation costs for environmental liabilities may exceed the provisions we have made” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023.Our sustainability strategy is a foundational element in achieving our purpose to create value and improve lives through sustainable and responsible mining. Sustainability and safety are integrated into the business at all levels of the organization through our global policies, standards, strategies, business plans and remuneration plans. For additional information on the Company’s reclamation and remediation liabilities, refer to Notes 5 and 17 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide additional information only and do not have any standard meaning prescribed by GAAP. These measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for measures of performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Refer to Non-GAAP Financial Measures within Part II, Item 7 within our Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023 for further information on the non-GAAP financial measures presented below, including why management believes that its presentation of non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information to investors.
Net income (loss) attributable to Newmont stockholders is reconciled to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as follows:
(1)Change in fair value of investments, included in Other income (loss), net, primarily represents unrealized gains and losses related to the Company's investments in current and non-current marketable and other equity securities.(2)(Gain) loss on asset and investment sales, net, included in Other income (loss), net, in 2023 is primarily comprised of the net gain recognized on the exchange of the previously held Maverix investment for Triple Flag and the subsequent sale of the Triple Flag investment. Refer to Note 10 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information. For 2022, primarily comprised of the loss recognized on the sale of the La Zanja equity method investment. Refer to Note 1 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.(3)Impairment charges, included in Other expense, net, represents non-cash write-downs of various assets that are no longer in use and materials and supplies inventories.(4)Restructuring and severance, included in Other expense, net, primarily represents severance and related costs associated with significant organizational or operating model changes implemented by the Company for all periods presented.(5)Pension settlement, included in Other income (loss), net, represents pension settlement charges in 2022 related to the annuitization of certain defined benefit plans. For further information, refer to Note 7 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.(6)Settlement costs, included in Other expense, net, are primarily comprised of a legal settlement and a voluntary contribution made to support humanitarian efforts in Ukraine in 2022.(7)Reclamation and remediation charges, included in Reclamation and remediation, represent revisions to reclamation and remediation plans at the Company's former operating properties and historic mining operations that have entered the closure phase and have no substantive future economic value. For further information, refer to Note 5 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.(8)Other represents income received during the first quarter of 2023, on the favorable settlement of certain matters that were outstanding at the time of sale of the related investment in 2022. Amounts included in Other income (loss), net.
Net income (loss) attributable to Newmont stockholders is reconciled to Adjusted net income (loss) as follows:
(1)Per share measures may not recalculate due to rounding.(2)Change in fair value of investments, included in Other income (loss), net, primarily represents unrealized gains and losses related to the Company's investment in current and non-current marketable and other equity securities. (3)(Gain) loss on asset and investment sales, net, included in Other income (loss), net, primarily represents the net gain recognized on the exchange of the previously held Maverix investment for Triple Flag and the subsequent sale of the Triple Flag investment. Refer to Note 10 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.(4)Impairment charges, included in Other expense, net, represents non-cash write-downs of various assets that are no longer in use and materials and supplies inventories.(5)Restructuring and severance, included in Other expense, net, primarily represents severance and related costs associated with significant organizational or operating model changes implemented by the Company.(6)Other represents income received on the favorable settlement of certain matters that were outstanding at the time of sale of the related investment in 2022. Amounts included in Other income (loss), net.(7)The tax effect of adjustments, included in Income and mining tax benefit (expense), represents the tax effect of adjustments in footnotes (2) through (6), as described above, and are calculated using the applicable regional tax rate.(8)Valuation allowance and other tax adjustments, included in Income and mining tax benefit (expense), is recorded for items such as foreign tax credits, capital losses, disallowed foreign losses, and the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities. The adjustment for the three months ended March 31, 2023 reflects the net increase or (decrease) to net operating losses, capital losses, tax credit carryovers, and other deferred tax assets subject to valuation allowance of $10, the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities of $17, net reductions to the reserve for uncertain tax positions of $11, other tax adjustments of $2. For further information on reductions to the reserve for uncertain tax positions, refer to Note 8 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. (9)Adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share is calculated using diluted common shares in accordance with GAAP.
(1)Per share measures may not recalculate due to rounding.(2)Pension settlement, included in Other income (loss), net, represent pension settlement charges related to the annuitization of certain defined benefit plans. For further information, refer to Note 7 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. (3)Change in fair value of investments, included in Other income (loss), net, primarily represents unrealized gains and losses related to the Company's investment in current and non-current marketable and other equity securities.(4)(Gain) loss on asset and investment sales, net, included in Other income (loss), net, primarily represents the loss recognized on the sale of the La Zanja equity method investment. For further information, refer to Note 1 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.(5)Reclamation and remediation charges, included in Reclamation and remediation, represent revisions to reclamation and remediation plans at the Company's former operating properties and historic mining operations that have entered the closure phase and have no substantive future economic value. Refer to Note 5 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statement for further information.(6)Settlement costs, included in Other expense, net, primarily are comprised of legal settlement and a voluntary contribution made to support humanitarian efforts in Ukraine.(7)Restructuring and severance, included in Other expense, net, primarily represents severance and related costs associated with significant organizational or operating model changes implemented by the Company. (8)The tax effect of adjustments, included in Income and mining tax benefit (expense), represents the tax effect of adjustments in footnotes (2) through (7), as described above, and are calculated using the applicable regional tax rate.(9)Valuation allowance and other tax adjustments, included in Income and mining tax benefit (expense), is recorded for items such as foreign tax credits, alternative minimum tax credits, capital losses, disallowed foreign losses, and the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities. The adjustment for the three months ended March 31, 2022 reflects the net increase or (decrease) to net operating losses, capital losses, tax credit carryovers, and other deferred tax assets subject to valuation allowance of $12, the effects of changes in foreign exchange rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities of $(3), net reductions to the reserve for uncertain tax positions of $(12), and other tax adjustments of $1.(10)Adjusted net income (loss) per diluted share is calculated using diluted common shares in accordance with GAAP.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Free Cash Flow to Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, which the Company believes to be the GAAP financial measure most directly comparable to Free Cash Flow, as well as information regarding Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities and Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities.
(1)Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities includes Additions to property, plant and mine development, which is included in the Company’s computation of Free Cash Flow.
Net Debt is calculated as Debt and Lease and other financing obligations less Cash and cash equivalents and time deposits included in Time deposits and other investments, as presented on the Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. Cash and cash equivalents and time deposits are subtracted from Debt and Lease and other financing obligations as these are highly liquid, low-risk investments and could be used to reduce the Company's debt obligations. The following table sets forth a reconciliation of Net Debt, a non-GAAP financial measure, to Debt and Lease and other financing obligations, which the Company believes to be the GAAP financial measures most directly comparable to Net Debt.
(1)Time deposits are included within Time deposits and other investments on the Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. Refer to Note 10 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Costs applicable to sales per ounce/gold equivalent ounce are calculated by dividing the costs applicable to sales of gold and other metals by gold ounces or gold equivalent ounces sold, respectively. These measures are calculated for the periods presented on a consolidated basis.The following tables reconcile these non-GAAP measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
(1)Includes by-product credits of $30 and $27 during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(2)Excludes Depreciation and amortization and Reclamation and remediation.(3)Per ounce measures may not recalculate due to rounding.
(1)Includes by-product credits of $2 and $2 during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(2)Excludes Depreciation and amortization and Reclamation and remediation.(3)Gold equivalent ounces is calculated as pounds or ounces produced multiplied by the ratio of the other metals price to the gold price, using Gold ($1,400/oz.), Copper ($3.50/lb.), Silver ($20.00/oz.), Lead ($1.00/lb.) and Zinc ($1.20/lb.) pricing for 2023 and Gold ($1,200/oz.), Copper ($3.25/lb.), Silver ($23.00/oz.), Lead ($0.95/lb.) and Zinc ($1.15/lb.) pricing for 2022.(4)Per ounce measures may not recalculate due to rounding.
All-in sustaining costs represent the sum of certain costs, recognized as GAAP financial measures, that management considers to be associated with production. All-in sustaining costs per ounce amounts are calculated by dividing all-in sustaining costs by gold ounces or gold equivalent ounces sold.
(1)Excludes Depreciation and amortization and Reclamation and remediation.(2)Includes by-product credits of $32 and excludes co-product revenues of $376.(3)Includes stockpile and leach pad inventory adjustments of $1 at Akyem, and $1 at NGM.(4)Beginning January 1, 2023, COVID-19 specific costs incurred in the ordinary course of business are recognized in Costs applicable to sales.(5)Reclamation costs include operating accretion and amortization of asset retirement costs of $24 and $30, respectively, and exclude accretion and reclamation and remediation adjustments at former operating properties that have entered the closure phase and have no substantive future economic value of $38 and $4, respectively.(6)Advanced projects, research and development and exploration excludes development expenditures of $2 at Peñasquito, $1 at Merian, $1 at Cerro Negro, $4 at Tanami, $6 at Ahafo, $3 at Akyem, $3 at NGM, and $19 at Corporate and Other, totaling $39 related to developing new operations or major projects at existing operations where these projects will materially benefit the operation.(7)Other expense, net is adjusted for impairment charges of $4 and restructuring and severance of $2.(8)Includes sustaining capital expenditures of $285. See Liquidity and Capital Resources within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis for sustaining capital expenditures by segment.(9)Excludes development capital expenditures, capitalized interest and the change in accrued capital totaling $241. See Liquidity and Capital Resources within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis for discussion of major development projects.(10)Includes finance lease payments and other costs for sustaining projects of $22.(11)Per ounce measures may not recalculate due to rounding.(12)Corporate and Other includes the Company's business activities relating to its corporate and regional offices and all equity method investments. Refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.(13)Gold equivalent ounces is calculated as pounds or ounces produced multiplied by the ratio of the other metals price to the gold price, using Gold ($1,400/oz.), Copper ($3.50/lb.), Silver ($20.00/oz.), Lead ($1.00/lb.) and Zinc ($1.20/lb.) pricing for 2023.
(1)Excludes Depreciation and amortization and Reclamation and remediation.(2)Includes by-product credits of $29 and excludes co-product revenues of $509.(3)Includes stockpile and leach pad inventory adjustments of $5 at CC&V, $3 at Merian, and $1 at NGM.(4)Reclamation costs include operating accretion and amortization of asset retirement costs of $16 and $22, respectively, and exclude accretion and reclamation and remediation adjustments at former operating properties that have entered the closure phase and have no substantive future economic value of $28 and $17, respectively.(5)Advanced projects, research and development and exploration excludes development expenditures of $1 at Porcupine, $2 at Peñasquito, $2 at Merian, $3 at Cerro Negro, $1 at Yanacocha, $3 at Tanami, $3 at Ahafo, $3 at Akyem, $3 at NGM, and $16 at Corporate and Other, totaling $37 related to developing new operations or major projects at existing operations where these projects will materially benefit the operation.(6)Other expense, net includes incremental COVID-19 costs incurred as a result of actions taken to protect against the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic at our operational sites of $17. (7)Other expense, net is adjusted settlement costs of $13 and restructuring and severance of $1. (8)Includes sustaining capital expenditures of $220. See Liquidity and Capital Resources within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis for sustaining capital expenditures by segment. (9)Excludes development capital expenditures, capitalized interest and the change in accrued capital totaling $217. See Liquidity and Capital Resources within Part I, Item 2, Management's Discussion and Analysis for discussion of major development projects.(10)Includes finance lease payments for sustaining projects of $17.(11)Per ounce measures may not recalculate due to rounding.(12)Corporate and Other includes the Company's business activities relating to its corporate and regional offices and all equity method investments. Refer to Note 3 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.(13)Gold equivalent ounces is calculated as pounds or ounces produced multiplied by the ratio of the other metals price to the gold price, using Gold ($1,200/oz.), Copper ($3.25/lb.), Silver ($23.00/oz.), Lead ($0.95/lb.) and Zinc ($1.15/lb.) pricing for 2022.
For a discussion of Risks and Uncertainties and Recently Adopted and Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, refer to Note 2 of the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.Refer to our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Accounting Developments and Critical Accounting Estimates included in Part II of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023 for additional information on our critical accounting policies and estimates.
Certain statements contained in this report (including information incorporated by reference herein) are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and are intended to be covered by the safe harbor provided for under these sections. Words such as “expect(s)”, “feel(s)”, “believe(s)”, “will”, “may”, “anticipate(s)”, “estimate(s)”, “should”, “intend(s)” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Our forward-looking statements may include, without limitation:•estimates regarding future earnings and the sensitivity of earnings to gold, copper, silver, lead, zinc, and other metal prices;•estimates of future mineral production and sales;•estimates of future production costs, other expenses and taxes for specific operations and on a consolidated basis;•estimates of future cash flows and the sensitivity of cash flows to gold, copper, silver, lead, zinc, and other metal prices;•estimates of future capital expenditures, construction, production or closure activities and other cash needs, for specific operations and on a consolidated basis, and expectations as to the funding or timing thereof;•estimates as to the projected development of certain ore deposits, including the timing of such development, the costs of such development and other capital costs, financing plans for these deposits and expected production commencement dates;•estimates of reserves and resources statements regarding future exploration results and reserve and resource replacement and the sensitivity of reserves to metal price changes;•statements regarding the availability of, and terms and costs related to, future borrowing or financing and expectations regarding future share repurchase transactions, debt repayments, or debt tender transactions; •statements regarding future dividends and returns to shareholders;•estimates regarding future exploration expenditures, and discoveries;•statements regarding fluctuations in financial and currency markets;•estimates regarding potential cost savings, productivity, operating performance and ownership and cost structures;•expectations regarding statements regarding future transactions, including, without limitation, statements related to future acquisitions and projected benefits, synergies and costs associated with acquisitions and related matters;•expectations of future equity and enterprise value;•expectations regarding the start-up time, design, mine life, production and costs applicable to sales and exploration potential of our projects;•statements regarding future hedge and derivative positions or modifications thereto;•statements regarding local, community, political, economic or governmental conditions and environments;•statements and expectations regarding the impacts of COVID-19, COVID variants and other health and safety conditions; •statements regarding the impacts of changes in the legal and regulatory environment in which we operate including, without limitation, relating to regional, national, domestic and foreign laws;•statements regarding climate strategy and expectations regarding greenhouse gas emission targets and related operating costs and capital expenditures;•statements regarding expected changes in the tax regimes in which we operate, including, without limitation, estimates of future tax rates and estimates of the impacts to income tax expense, valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities, and other financial impacts;•estimates of income taxes and expectations relating to tax contingencies or tax audits;•estimates of future costs, accruals for reclamation costs and other liabilities for certain environmental matters, including without limitation, in connection with water treatment and tailings management;•statements relating to potential impairments, revisions or write-offs, including without limitation, the result of fluctuation in metal prices, unexpected production or capital costs, or unrealized reserve potential;•estimates of pension and other post-retirement costs;•statements regarding estimates of timing of adoption of recent accounting pronouncements and expectations regarding future impacts to the financial statements resulting from accounting pronouncements;•estimates of future cost reductions, synergies, savings and efficiencies in connection with full potential programs and initiatives; and•expectations regarding future exploration and the development, growth and potential of operations, projects and investments.Where we express an expectation or belief as to future events or results, such expectation or belief is expressed in good faith and believed to have a reasonable basis. However, our forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, which could cause actual results to differ materially from future results expressed, projected or implied by those forward-looking statements. Such risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to:•the price of gold, copper, silver, lead, zinc, and other metal prices and commodities;•the cost of operations;•currency fluctuations;•other macroeconomic events impacting inflation, interest rates, supply chain, and capital markets;•geological and metallurgical assumptions;•operating performance of equipment, processes and facilities;•environmental impacts and geotechnical challenges including in connection with climate-related and other catastrophic events;•labor relations;•healthy and safety impacts including in connection with global events, pandemics, and epidemics; •timing of receipt of necessary governmental permits or approvals;•domestic and foreign laws or regulations, particularly relating to the environment, mining and processing;•changes in tax laws;•domestic and international economic and political conditions;•our ability to obtain or maintain necessary financing; and•other risks and hazards associated with mining operations.More detailed information regarding these factors is included in the section titled Item 1, Business; Item 1A, Risk Factors in the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 as well as elsewhere throughout this report. Many of these factors are beyond our ability to control or predict. Given these uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements.All subsequent written and oral forward-looking statements attributable to Newmont or to persons acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by these cautionary statements. We disclaim any intention or obligation to update publicly any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required under applicable securities laws.