
The discussion and analysis below has been organized as follows:•Executive summary, including introduction and overview, business strategy, and changes to the business environment during the period, including environmental and regulatory matters; •Results of operations; •Liquidity and capital resources including liquidity position, financial condition addressing credit ratings, material cash requirements and commitments, and other obligations; and•Known trends that may affect NRG's results of operations and financial condition in the future.As you read this discussion and analysis, refer to NRG's Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations to this Form 10-Q, which present the results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. Also refer to NRG's 2022 Form 10-K, which includes detailed discussions of various items impacting the Company's business, results of operations and financial condition, including: General section; Strategy section; Business Overview section, including how regulation, weather, and other factors affect NRG's business; and Critical Accounting Estimates section.
NRG Energy, Inc., or NRG or the Company, is a leading energy, smart home and services company fueled by market-leading brands, proprietary technologies, and complementary sales channels. NRG brings the power of energy to customers by producing and selling energy and related products and services. Across the United States and Canada, NRG develops innovative, sustainable solutions, predominately under brand names such as NRG, Reliant, Direct Energy, Green Mountain Energy and Vivint. The Company has a customer base that includes approximately 7.5 million residential consumers in addition to commercial, industrial, and wholesale customers, supported by approximately 16 GW of generation.
NRG's strategy is to maximize stockholder value through the safe production and sale of reliable electricity and natural gas to its customers in the markets it serves, while also providing innovative solutions to the end-use energy or service consumer. This strategy is intended to enable the Company to optimize the integrated model to generate stable and predictable cash flow, significantly strengthen earnings and cost competitiveness, and lower risk and volatility. Sustainability is a philosophy that underpins and facilitates value creation across NRG's business for its stakeholders. It is an integral piece of NRG's strategy and ties directly to business success, reduced risks and enhanced reputation.To effectuate the Company’s strategy, NRG is focused on: (i) serving the energy needs of end-use residential, commercial and industrial, and wholesale counterparties in competitive markets and optimizing on cross selling opportunities through its multiple brands and channels; (ii) offering a variety of energy products and services, including renewable energy solutions and smart home products and services that are differentiated by innovative features, premium service, integrated platforms, sustainability, and loyalty/affinity programs; (iii) excellence in operating performance of its assets; (iv) optimal hedging of its portfolio; and (v) engaging in disciplined and transparent capital allocation.
The Company’s regulatory matters are described in the Company’s 2022 Form 10-K in Item 1, Business — Regulatory Matters. These matters have been updated below and in Note 16, Regulatory Matters.As participants in wholesale and retail energy markets and owners and operators of power plants, certain NRG entities are subject to regulation by various federal and state government agencies. These include the CFTC, FERC, NRC and the PUCT, as well as other public utility commissions in certain states where NRG's generation or distributed generation assets are located. In addition, NRG is subject to the market rules, procedures and protocols of the various ISO and RTO markets in which it participates. Likewise, certain NRG entities participating in the retail markets are subject to rules and regulations established by the states and provinces in which NRG entities are licensed to sell at retail. NRG must also comply with the mandatory reliability requirements imposed by NERC and the regional reliability entities in the regions where NRG operates.NRG's operations within the ERCOT footprint are not subject to rate regulation by FERC, as they are deemed to operate solely within the ERCOT market and not in interstate commerce. These operations are subject to regulation by the PUCT, as well as to regulation by the NRC with respect to NRG's ownership interest in STP.
NRG is affected by rule/tariff changes that occur in the ISO regions. For further discussion on regulatory developments see Note 16, Regulatory Matters.
Public Utility Commission of Texas’ Actions with Respect to Wholesale Pricing and Market Design — In September 2021, the PUCT opened a rulemaking project to evaluate whether it should amend its rules to modify the High System Wide Offer cap ("HCAP") and the ORDC, which is intended to ensure prices in the competitive market appropriately reflect the value of operating reserves as the system approaches scarcity conditions. This rulemaking project concluded in December 2021, resulting in a rule amendment that lowered the HCAP to $5,000 per MWh and which expands the minimum contingency level to 3,000 MW in Phase I. These two changes are broadly offsetting in their effect on overall average energy prices. In 2022, the PUCT has focused on the development of a winter firm fuel product. The PUCT directed ERCOT to issue a Request for Proposal to procure dual fuel capability with on-site fuel storage as part of the initial firm fuel procurement for the winter of 2022 and 2023. The procurement amount was 2,940MW with a total cost of $53 million.The PUCT engaged an independent consultant, E3, to evaluate various resource adequacy proposals and recommend a policy direction to increase incentives for investment in dispatchable generation in ERCOT. On November 10, 2022, the independent consultant provided a report including various market design options such as a Forward Reliability Market, Load Servicing Entity Reliability Obligation and a new concept called a Performance Credit Mechanism ("PCM"). The PCM measures real-time contribution to system reliability and provides compensation for resources to be available. The PUCT staff filed a summary of comments and their recommendations, which support PCM. On January 19, 2023, the Commission approved an order adopting the PCM as their policy direction for resource adequacy in ERCOT, however, implementation is delayed until the legislature reviews. Ruling on Pricing during Winter Storm Uri — On March 17, 2023, the Third Court of Appeals issued a ruling in Luminant Energy Co. v. PUCT, which is an appeal relating to the validity of two orders issued by the PUCT on February 15 and 16, 2021, respectively, governing scarcity pricing in the ERCOT wholesale electricity market during Winter Storm Uri. The Third Court found that the PUCT exceeded its statutory authority by ordering the market price of energy to be set at the high system wide offer cap due to scarcity conditions as a result of firm load shed occurring in ERCOT. The Third Court reversed the PUCT's orders and remanded the case. At the March 23, 2023 open meeting, the PUCT voted to appeal the Third Court's ruling to the Supreme Court of Texas. The outcome of this case could require a repricing of the market prices during that time.Voluntary Mitigation ("VMP") Changes — On March 13, 2023, the PUCT Staff determined that a portion of NRG's VMP should be terminated due to the increase in procurement of ancillary services by ERCOT, specifically non-spin reserve services, following Winter Storm Uri. As such, PUCT Staff terminated part of the VMP for NRG which provides protection from wholesale market power abuse accusations related to offers for ancillary services. NRG agreed with these changes to the VMP. At the March 23, 2023 open meeting, the PUCT approved the amended VMP.
PJM Delays Base Residual Auction Results and Files to Update Tariff — The Base Residual Auction for the 2024/2025 delivery year commenced on December 7, 2022 and closed on December 13, 2022. On December 19, 2022, PJM announced that it would delay the publication of the auction results. On December 23, 2022, PJM made a filing at FERC to revise the definition of Locational Deliverability Area Reliability Requirement in the Tariff. This would allow PJM to exclude certain resources from the calculation of the Local Deliverability Area Reliability Requirement. On February 21, 2023, FERC accepted PJM's filing. Multiple parties, including NRG, have filed for rehearing. The price of the auction cleared was significantly lower as a result of the PJM Tariff change.Capacity Performance Penalties and Bonuses from Winter Storm Elliott — PJM experienced approximately 23 hours of Capacity Performance events from December 23-24, 2022 across PJM's entire footprint. The Company will be subject to penalty or bonus payments related to the events with settlements to occur in 2023. PJM anticipates that certain market participants who incurred penalties may encounter challenges in paying penalties levied upon them. This may result in bonus payments being prorated. On February 2, 2023, PJM made a filing at FERC that, if approved, would give PJM the ability to extend the payment period for PJM members who incurred penalties for an additional 9 months. On April 3, 2023, FERC approved PJM's request to allow Winter Storm Elliott penalty payments to be spread over 9 months (with interest) and allow future penalties to have a 9 month window to be satisfied without interest. In addition, multiple generators filed various complaints against PJM at FERC alleging that PJM violated its Tariff in, among other things, the manner in which it operated the system during Winter Storm Elliott and the resulting assessment of capacity performance penalties. PJM Files at FERC to Delay the Upcoming Base Residual Auctions — On April 11, 2023, PJM filed to delay the Base Residual Auctions for the 2025/2026 to 2028/2029 delivery years. PJM proposes to develop market reforms to improve the operation of the capacity market, and plans to make a filing regarding those reforms by October 1, 2023. PJM proposes to restart the auctions after FERC's ruling on these market changes.
California Resource Adequacy Proceedings — As part of the Integrated Resource Procurement docket, the CPUC approved a decision on June 24, 2021 that requires all LSEs to procure a pro rata share of 11.5 GW of new non-fossil resource adequacy from 2023 to 2026. In that same docket, the CPUC ordered the state's major investor-owned utilities to procure additional summer reliability resources through 2023, with recent staff proposals recommending an extension of these order through 2025. Further procurement order in this docket issued in February 2023 directed LSEs to procure an additional four GW of clean resources in the 2026 to 2028 timeframe. Reserve margin increased from 15 percent to 16 percent in 2023 and at least 17 percent in 2024. SB846 establishes a pathway for PG&E's Diablo Canyon Nuclear power plant, which units are scheduled to close in 2024 and 2025, to remain open for at least five additional years. Recently opened rulemaking will determine how the resource adequacy from the extension will be treated. Finally, the CPUC released a proposed order in March 2023 regarding details for implementation of a new Resource Adequacy ("RA") program beginning in 2025 which will require procurement to meet needs during every hour of the day. The result of these changes will likely keep RA prices elevated in the near term and if LSEs cannot meet their RA obligations, penalties may be issued.
NRG is subject to numerous environmental laws in the development, construction, ownership and operation of power plants. These laws generally require that governmental permits and approvals be obtained before construction and maintained during operation of power plants. Federal and state environmental laws historically have become more stringent over time. Future laws may require the addition of emissions controls or other environmental controls or impose restrictions on the Company's operations. Complying with environmental laws often involves specialized human resources and significant capital and operating expenses, as well as occasionally curtailing operations. NRG decides to invest capital for environmental controls based on the relative certainty of the requirements, an evaluation of compliance options, and the expected economic returns on capital.A number of regulations that affect the Company have been revised recently and continue to be revised by the EPA, including ash storage and disposal requirements, NAAQS revisions and implementation and effluent limitation guidelines. NRG will evaluate the impact of these regulations as they are revised but cannot fully predict the impact of each until anticipated revisions and legal challenges are resolved. The Company’s environmental matters are described in the Company’s 2022 Form 10-K in Item 1, Business - Environmental Matters and Item 1A, Risk Factors. These matters have been updated in Note 17, Environmental Matters, to the condensed consolidated financial statements of this Form 10-Q and as follows.
The CAA and related regulations (as well as similar state and local requirements) have the potential to affect air emissions, operating practices and pollution control equipment required at power plants. Under the CAA, the EPA sets NAAQS for certain pollutants including SO2, ozone, and PM2.5. Many of the Company's facilities are located in or near areas that are classified by the EPA as not achieving certain NAAQS (non-attainment areas). The relevant NAAQS may become more stringent. In January 2023, the EPA proposed increasing the stringency of the PM2.5 NAAQS. The Company maintains a comprehensive compliance strategy to address continuing and new requirements. Complying with increasingly stringent air regulations could require the installation of additional emissions control equipment at some NRG facilities or retiring of units if installing such controls is not economic. Significant changes to air regulatory programs affecting the Company are described below.CPP/ACE Rules — The attention in recent years on GHG emissions has resulted in federal and state regulations. In October 2015, the EPA promulgated the CPP, addressing GHG emissions from existing EGUs. On February 9, 2016, the U.S. Supreme Court stayed the CPP. In July 2019, EPA promulgated the ACE rule, which rescinded the CPP, which had sought to broadly regulate CO2 emissions from the power sector. On January 19, 2021, the D.C. Circuit vacated the ACE rule (but on February 22, 2021, at the EPA's request, stayed the issuance of the portion of the mandate that would vacate the repeal of the CPP). On June 30, 2022, the U.S. Supreme Court held that the "generation shifting" approach in the CPP exceeded the powers granted to the EPA by Congress. The Court did not address the related issues of whether the EPA may adopt only measures applied at each source. The Company anticipates that there will be additional rulemaking by the EPA over the next several years.Cross-State Air Pollution Rule ("CSAPR") — On March 15, 2023, the EPA signed and released a prepublication of a final rule that if and when published in the Federal Register would have significantly revised the CSAPR to address the good-neighbor obligations of the 2015 ozone NAAQS for 23 states after earlier having disapproved numerous state plans to address the issue. Several states, including Texas, challenged the EPA's disapproval of their state plans. On May 1, 2023, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit stayed the EPA's disapproval of Texas' and Louisiana's state plans, which disapprovals are a condition precedent to the EPA imposing its plan on Texas and Louisiana. Accordingly, the EPA may not publish this rule in the Federal Register or if it does publish the rule, it would be ineffective in Texas and Louisiana while the stay is pending. The rule would have decreased over time the ozone-season NOx allowances allocated to generators in the 23 states beginning this summer by assuming that participants in this cap-and-trade program had or would optimize existing NOx controls and later install additional NOx controls. The Company cannot predict the outcome of: (i) the legal challenges to the various state disapprovals; (ii) whether the EPA will proceeds with publication in the Federal Register; and (iii) legal challenges to the final rule if it is published in the Federal Register.
In April 2015, the EPA finalized the rule regulating byproducts of coal combustion (e.g., ash and gypsum) as solid wastes under the RCRA. On July 30, 2018, the EPA promulgated a rule that amended the ash rule by extending some of the deadlines and providing more flexibility for compliance. On August 21, 2018, the D.C. Circuit found, among other things, that the EPA had not adequately regulated unlined ponds and legacy surface impoundments. On August 28, 2020, the EPA finalized "A Holistic Approach to Closure Part A: Deadline to Initiate Closure," which amended the April 2015 Rule to address the August 2018 D.C. Circuit decision and extend some of the deadlines. On November 12, 2020, the EPA finalized "A Holistic Approach to Closure Part B: Alternative Demonstration for Unlined Surface Impoundments," which further amended the April 2015 Rule to, among other things, provide procedures for requesting approval to operate existing ash impoundments with an alternate liner. NRG anticipates further rulemaking related to the Federal Permit Program and legacy surface impoundments.
Under certain federal, state and local environmental laws, a current or previous owner or operator of a facility, including an electric generating facility, may be required to investigate and remediate releases or threatened releases of hazardous or toxic substances or petroleum products. NRG may be responsible for property damage, personal injury and investigation and remediation costs incurred by a party in connection with hazardous material releases or threatened releases. These laws impose liability without regard to whether the owner knew of or caused the presence of the hazardous substances, and the courts have interpreted liability under such laws to be strict (without fault) and joint and several. Cleanup obligations can often be triggered during the closure or decommissioning of a facility, in addition to spills during its operations. Nuclear Waste — The federal government's program to construct a nuclear waste repository at Yucca Mountain, Nevada was discontinued in 2010. Since 1998, the U.S. DOE has been in default of the federal government's obligations to begin accepting spent nuclear fuel, or SNF, and high-level radioactive waste, or HLW, under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act. Owners of nuclear plants, including the owners of STP, had been required to enter into contracts setting out the obligations of the owners and the U.S. DOE, including the fees to be paid by the owners for the U.S. DOE's services to license a spent fuel repository. Effective May 16, 2014, the U.S. DOE stopped collecting the fees.On February 5, 2013, STPNOC entered into a settlement agreement with the U.S. DOE for payment of damages relating to the U.S. DOE's failure to accept SNF and HLW under the Nuclear Waste Policy Act through December 31, 2013, which has been extended four times through addendums to cover payments through December 31, 2025. There are no facilities for the reprocessing or permanent disposal of SNF currently in operation in the U.S., nor has the NRC licensed any such facilities. STPNOC currently stores all SNF generated by its nuclear generating facilities on-site. STPNOC plans to continue to assert claims against the U.S. DOE for damages relating to the U.S. DOE's failure to accept SNF and HLW.Under the federal Low-Level Radioactive Waste Policy Act of 1980, as amended in 1985, the state of Texas is required to provide, either on its own or jointly with other states in a compact, for the disposal of all low-level radioactive waste generated within the state. Texas is currently in a compact with the state of Vermont, and the compact low-level waste facility located in Andrews County in Texas has been operational since 2012.
The Company is required under the CWA to comply with intake and discharge requirements, requirements for technological controls and operating practices. As with air quality regulations, federal and state water regulations have become more stringent and imposed new requirements.Effluent Limitations Guidelines — In November 2015, the EPA revised the ELG for Steam Electric Generating Facilities, which imposed more stringent requirements (as individual permits were renewed) for wastewater streams from FGD, fly ash, bottom ash and flue gas mercury control. On September 18, 2017, the EPA promulgated a final rule that, among other things, postponed the compliance dates to preserve the status quo for FGD wastewater and bottom ash transport water by two years to November 2020 until the EPA amended the rule. On October 13, 2020, the EPA amended the 2015 ELG rule by: (i) altering the stringency of certain limits for FGD wastewater; (ii) relaxing the zero-discharge requirement for bottom ash transport water; and (iii) changing several deadlines. On July 26, 2021, the EPA announced that it is initiating a new rulemaking to evaluate revising the ELG rule. While the EPA is developing the new rule, the existing rule (as amended in 2020) will stay in place, and the EPA expects permitting authorities to continue to implement the current regulation. On March 29, 2023, the EPA proposed revisions to the ELG and is accepting comments on the proposal until May 30, 2023. In October 2021, NRG informed its regulators that the Company intends to comply with the ELG by ceasing combustion of coal by the end of 2028 at its domestic coal units outside of Texas, and installing appropriate controls by the end of 2025 at its two plants that have coal-fired units in Texas.
Ash Regulation in Illinois — On July 30, 2019, Illinois enacted legislation that required the state to promulgate regulations regarding coal ash at surface impoundments. On April 15, 2021, the state promulgated the implementing regulation, which became effective on April 21, 2021. NRG has applied for initial operating permits and has begun to apply for construction permits (for closure) as required by the regulation.Houston Nonattainment for 2008 Ozone Standard — During the fourth quarter of 2022, the EPA changed the Houston area's classification from Serious to Severe nonattainment for the 2008 Ozone Standard. Accordingly, Texas is required to develop a new control strategy and submit it to the EPA.
The following significant events have occurred during 2023 as further described within this Management's Discussion and Analysis and the condensed consolidated financial statements:
On March 10, 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of Vivint. The Company paid $12 per share, or $2.6 billion in cash. For further discussion, see Note 4, Acquisitions and Dispositions.
On March 9, 2023, the Company issued 650,000 shares of 10.25% Series A Fixed-Rate Reset Cumulative Redeemable Perpetual Preferred Stock. The proceeds, net of issuance costs, of $636 million were used to fund the Vivint acquisition. For further discussion, see Note 10, Changes in Capital Structure.
On March 9, 2023, the Company issued $740 million of aggregate principal amount of 7.000% senior secured first lien notes due 2023. The net proceeds of $724 million, net of issuance costs, were used to fund the Vivint acquisition. For further discussion, see Note 8, Long-term Debt and Finance Leases.
On January 6, 2023, NRG closed on the sale of land and related assets from the Astoria site, within the East region of operations, for initial proceeds of $212 million, subject to transaction fees of $3 million and certain indemnifications. NRG recognized a gain on the sale of $199 million. As part of the transaction, NRG entered into an agreement to lease the land back for the purpose of operating the Astoria gas turbines. The lease agreement is expected to terminate by the end of the year.
In May 2022, W.A. Parish Unit 8 came offline as a result of damage to the steam turbine/generator. Based on work completed to date, the Company is targeting to return the unit to service by the end of the second quarter of 2023.
In the first quarter of 2023, NRG increased the annual dividend to $1.51 from $1.40 per share, representing an 8% increase from 2022. The Company expects to target an annual dividend growth rate of 7-9% per share in subsequent years.
The Company's strategy is to procure mid to long-term generation through power purchase agreements. NRG has entered into Renewable PPAs totaling approximately 1.9 GW with third-party project developers and other counterparties, of which approximately 1.1 GW are operational as of April 30, 2023. The average tenure of these agreements is eleven years. The Company expects to continue evaluating and executing similar agreements that support the needs of the business. The total GW procured through Renewable PPAs may be impacted by contract terminations when they occur.
The Company’s trends are described in the Company’s 2022 Form 10-K in Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Business Environment.
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, for a discussion of recent accounting developments.
The following table provides selected financial information for the Company:
(a)Includes gains and losses from financially settled transactions(b)Includes trading gains and losses and ancillary revenues(c)Includes amortization of SO2 and NOx credits and excludes amortization of RGGI credits
The following table summarizes average on peak power prices for each of the major markets in which NRG operates for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. Texas, East and West average on-peak power prices decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the same period in 2022 as a result of lower natural gas prices, while average CAISO on-peak power prices increased primarily driven by colder winter weather in California in 2023.
(a)Average on peak power prices based on real time settlement prices as published by the respective ISOs(b)Average on peak power prices based on day ahead settlement prices as published by the respective ISOs
The Company calculates gross margin in order to evaluate operating performance as revenues less cost of fuel, purchased energy and other costs of sales, mark-to-market for economic hedging activities, contract and emission credit amortization and depreciation and amortization.
In addition to gross margin, the Company evaluates its operating performance using the measure of economic gross margin, which is not a GAAP measure and may not be comparable to other companies’ presentations or deemed more useful than the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this report. Economic gross margin should be viewed as a supplement to and not a substitute for the Company's presentation of gross margin, which is the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Economic gross margin is not intended to represent gross margin. The Company believes that economic gross margin is useful to investors as it is a key operational measure reviewed by the Company's chief operating decision maker. Economic gross margin is defined as the sum of retail revenue, energy revenue, capacity revenue and other revenue, less cost of fuel, purchased energy and other cost of sales. Economic gross margin does not include mark-to-market gains or losses on economic hedging activities, contract amortization, emissions credit amortization, depreciation and amortization, operations and maintenance, or other cost of operations.The below tables present the composition and reconciliation of gross margin and economic gross margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
The table below represents the weather metrics for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
(a)    National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration-Climate Prediction Center - A Cooling Degree Day, or CDD, represents the number of degrees that the mean temperature for a particular day is above 65 degrees Fahrenheit in each region. A Heating Degree Day, or HDD, represents the number of degrees that the mean temperature for a particular day is below 65 degrees Fahrenheit in each region. The CDDs/HDDs for a period of time are calculated by adding the CDDs/HDDs for each day during the period(b)   The West/Services/Other weather metrics are comprised of the average of the CDD and HDD regional results for the West - California and West - South Central regions
Gross margin decreased $4.0 billion and economic gross margin increased $220 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022.The tables below describe the changes in gross margin and economic gross margin by segment:
(a)   Includes results of operations following the acquisition date of March 10, 2023
Mark-to-market for economic hedging activities includes asset-backed hedges that have not been designated as cash flow hedges. Total net mark-to-market results decreased by $4.2 billion during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022.
The breakdown of gains and losses included in revenues and operating costs and expenses by segment was as follows:
Mark-to-market results consist of unrealized gains and losses on contracts that are not yet settled. The settlement of these transactions is reflected in the same revenue or cost caption as the items being hedged.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the $91 million gain in revenues from economic hedge positions was driven primarily by an increase in the value of open positions as a result of decreases in natural gas and power prices. The $2.0 billion loss in operating costs and expenses from economic hedge positions was driven primarily by a decrease in the value of open positions as a result of decreases in natural gas and power prices and the reversal of previously recognized unrealized gains on contracts that settled during the period.For the three months ended March 31, 2022, the $133 million loss in revenues from economic hedge positions was driven primarily by a decrease in the value of open positions as a result of increases in natural gas and power prices. The $2.4 billion gain in operating costs and expenses from economic hedge positions was driven primarily by an increase in the value of open positions as a result of increases in natural gas and power prices, partially offset by the reversal of previously recognized unrealized gains on contracts that settled during the period and acquired contracts that settled during the period.In accordance with ASC 815, the following table represents the results of the Company's financial and physical trading of energy commodities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022. The realized and unrealized financial and physical trading results are included in revenue. The Company's trading activities are subject to limits based on the Company's Risk Management Policy.
Operations and maintenance expense is comprised of the following:
(a)    Vivint includes results of operations following the acquisition date of March 10, 2023Operations and maintenance expense increased by $49 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, due to the following:
Other cost of operations is comprised of the following:
Other cost of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was flat, when compared to the same period in 2022, with fluctuations within other cost of operations shown below:
Depreciation and amortization are comprised of the following:
(a)    Vivint includes results of operations following the acquisition date of March 10, 2023Depreciation and amortization increased by $7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to higher amortization of intangible assets due to the acquisition of Vivint in March 2023, partially offset by lower depreciation at Midwest Generation as a result of asset impairments and retirements in 2022.
Selling, general and administrative costs are comprised of the following:
(a)    Vivint includes results of operations following the acquisition date of March 10, 2023Selling, general and administrative costs increased by $79 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, due to the following:
Acquisition-related transaction and integration costs of $71 million were incurred during the three months ended March 31, 2023, which consisted of $36 million of acquisition costs and $30 million of integration costs related to Vivint, as well as $5 million of integration costs related to Direct Energy.Acquisition-related transaction and integration costs of $8 million were incurred during the three months ended March 31, 2022, which are comprised primarily of integration costs related to Direct Energy.
The gain on sale of assets of $199 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was related to the sale of land and related assets from the Astoria site.
Other income, net increased by $16 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily driven by higher interest income.
Interest expense increased by $45 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to the Vivint acquisition including newly issued Senior Secured First Lien Notes, acquired debt of Vivint, borrowings on the Revolving Credit Facility and the Receivables Securitization Facilities as well as the write-off of the deferred financing costs associated with the cancellation of the bridge facility for the Vivint acquisition.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, an income tax benefit of $336 million was recorded on a pre-tax loss of $1.7 billion. For the same period in 2022, income tax expense of $571 million was recorded on pre-tax income of $2.3 billion. The effective tax rates were a benefit of 20.1% and expense of 24.8% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the effective tax rate was lower than the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to current state tax expense and permanent differences which when applied to year-to-date financial statement losses have an inverted effect and reduce the overall effective income tax rate. For the same period in 2022, the effective tax rate was higher than the statutory rate of 21% primarily due to state tax expense.
As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, NRG's total liquidity, excluding funds deposited by counterparties, of approximately $3.5 billion and $2.8 billion, respectively, was comprised of the following:
(a) Total capacity of Revolving Credit Facility and collective collateral facilities was $7.3 billion and $6.4 billion as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectivelyFor the three months ended March 31, 2023, total liquidity, excluding funds deposited by counterparties, increased by $739 million. Changes in cash and cash equivalent balances are further discussed hereinafter under the heading Cash Flow Discussion. Cash and cash equivalents at March 31, 2023 were predominantly held in bank deposits.Management believes that the Company's liquidity position and cash flows from operations will be adequate to finance operating and maintenance capital expenditures, to fund dividends, and to fund other liquidity commitments. Management continues to regularly monitor the Company's ability to finance the needs of its operating, financing and investing activity within the dictates of prudent balance sheet management.The Company remains committed to maintaining a strong balance sheet and continues to work to achieve investment grade credit metrics over time primarily through debt reduction and the realization of growth initiatives.
On March 1, 2023, following the Vivint Acquisition financing launch, Standard and Poor's downgraded the Company's issuer credit to BB with a Stable outlook from BB+. There was no change to Moody's and Fitch ratings at the time.
The principal sources of liquidity for NRG's future operating and maintenance capital expenditures are expected to be derived from cash on hand, cash flows from operations, and financing arrangements. As described in Note 8, Long-term Debt and Finance Leases, to this Form 10-Q, the Company's financing arrangements consist mainly of the Senior Notes, Convertible Senior Notes, Senior Secured First Lien Notes, Revolving Credit Facility, and tax-exempt bonds. As part of the acquisition of Vivint on March 10, 2023, NRG acquired Vivint's existing debt, which includes senior secured notes, senior notes and a senior secured term-loan.The Company's requirements for liquidity and capital resources, other than for operating its facilities, can generally be categorized by the following: (i) market operations activities; (ii) debt service obligations, as described in Note 8, Long-term Debt and Finance Leases; (iii) capital expenditures, including maintenance, repowering, development, and environmental; and (iv) allocations in connection with acquisition opportunities, debt repayments, share repurchases and dividend payments to stockholders, as described in Note 10, Changes in Capital Structure.
On March 10, 2023, the Company completed the acquisition of Vivint. The Company paid $12 per share, or $2.6 billion in cash. The Company funded the acquisition using a combination of $740 million in newly-issued secured corporate debt, $650 million in newly-issued preferred stock, $900 million drawn from its Revolving Credit Facility and Receivables Facilities, and cash on hand.
On March 9, 2023, the Company issued $740 million of aggregate principal amount of 7.000% senior notes due 2033. The 2033 Senior Notes are senior secured obligations of NRG and are guaranteed by certain of its subsidiaries. Interest is paid semi-annually beginning on September 15, 2023 until the maturity date of March 15, 2033. See Note 8, Long-term Debt and Finance Leases, for further discussion.
On March 9, 2023, the Company issued 650,000 shares of 10.25% Series A Fixed-Rate Reset Cumulative Redeemable Perpetual Preferred Stock. See Note 10, Changes in Capital Structure, for further discussion.
On February 14, 2023 (the “Revolving Credit Facility Amendment Effective Date”), the Company amended its Revolving Credit Facility to: (i) increase the existing revolving commitments thereunder by $600 million (the “Incremental Commitment”), (ii) extend the maturity date of a portion of the revolving commitments thereunder to February 14, 2028, (iii) transition the benchmark rate applicable to revolving loans from LIBOR to SOFR and (iv) make certain other amendments to the terms of the Revolving Credit Facility for purposes of, among other things, providing additional flexibility.On March 13, 2023, the Company amended its Revolving Credit Facility to, among other things, increase the existing revolving commitments by $45 million. As of March 31, 2023, there were outstanding borrowings of $725 million and there were $1.1 billion in letters of credit issued under the Revolving Credit Facility. As of April 30, 2023, there were outstanding borrowings of $650 million and $994 million in letters of credit issued under the Revolving Credit Facility.
On January 6, 2023, the Company closed on the sale of land and related assets from the Astoria site, within the East region of operations, for initial proceeds of $212 million, subject to transaction fees of $3 million and certain indemnifications. As part of the transaction, NRG entered into an agreement to lease the land back for the purpose of operating the Astoria gas turbines. The lease agreement is expected to terminate by the end of the year.
The Company's market operations activities require a significant amount of liquidity and capital resources. These liquidity requirements are primarily driven by: (i) margin and collateral posted with counterparties; (ii) margin and collateral required to participate in physical markets and commodity exchanges; (iii) timing of disbursements and receipts (e.g., buying energy before receiving retail revenues); and (iv) initial collateral for large structured transactions. As of March 31, 2023, the Company had total cash collateral outstanding of $293 million and $4.1 billion outstanding in letters of credit to third parties primarily to support its market activities. As of March 31, 2023, total funds deposited by counterparties were $330 million in cash and $445 million of letters of credit.Future liquidity requirements may change based on the Company's hedging activities and structures, fuel purchases, and future market conditions, including forward prices for energy and fuel and market volatility. In addition, liquidity requirements depend on the Company's credit ratings and general perception of its creditworthiness.
NRG has granted first liens to certain counterparties on a substantial portion of the Company's assets, subject to various exclusions including NRG's assets that have project-level financing and the assets of certain non-guarantor subsidiaries, to reduce the amount of cash collateral and letters of credit that it would otherwise be required to post from time to time to support its obligations under out-of-the-money hedge agreements. The first lien program does not limit the volume that can be hedged, or the value of underlying out-of-the-money positions. The first lien program also does not require NRG to post collateral above any threshold amount of exposure. The first lien structure is not subject to unwind or termination upon a ratings downgrade of a counterparty and has no stated maturity date.The Company's first lien counterparties may have a claim on its assets to the extent market prices differ from the hedged prices. As of March 31, 2023, all hedges under the first liens were out-of-the-money on a counterparty aggregate basis.The following table summarizes the amount of MW hedged against the Company's coal and nuclear assets and as a percentage relative to the Company's coal and nuclear capacity under the first lien structure as of March 31, 2023:
(a) Equivalent Net Sales include natural gas swaps converted using a weighted average heat rate by region(b) Net coal and nuclear capacity represents 80% of the Company’s total coal and nuclear assets eligible under the first lien, which excludes coal assets acquired with Midwest Generation and NRG's assets that have project level financing
The following tables and descriptions summarize the Company's capital expenditures for maintenance, environmental and growth investments for the three months ended March 31, 2023, and the estimated capital expenditures forecast for the remainder of 2023.
(a)Includes other investments, acquisitions and integration projects(b)Vivint includes expenditures following the acquisition date of March 10, 2023(c)Estimated capital expenditures related to W.A. Parish do not reflect expected insurance recoveriesGrowth investments for the three months ended March 31, 2023 include expenditures for a small book acquisition, integration operating expenses, as well as the Encina site improvements classified as ARO payments. NRG has completed its demolition activities at the site and has begun marketing the site.
NRG estimates that environmental capital expenditures from 2023 through 2027 required to comply with environmental laws will be approximately $42 million, primarily driven by the cost of complying with ELG at the Company's coal units in Texas.
During the first quarter of 2023, NRG increased the annual dividend to $1.51 from $1.40 per share and expects to target an annual dividend growth rate of 7%-9% per share in subsequent years. A quarterly dividend of $0.3775 per share was paid on the Company's common stock during the three months ended March 31, 2023. On April 19, 2023, NRG declared a quarterly dividend on the Company's common stock of $0.3775 per share, payable on May 15, 2023 to stockholders of record as of May 1, 2023.
NRG and its subsidiaries enter into various contracts that include indemnifications and guarantee provisions as a routine part of the Company’s business activities. For further discussion, see Note 27, Guarantees, to the Company's 2022 Form 10-K.
Variable interest in equity investments — NRG’s investment in Ivanpah is a variable interest entity for which NRG is not the primary beneficiary. NRG's pro-rata share of non-recourse debt was approximately $475 million as of March 31, 2023. This indebtedness may restrict the ability of Ivanpah to issue dividends or distributions to NRG.
NRG has a variety of contractual obligations and other market commitments that represent prospective cash requirements in addition to the Company's capital expenditure programs, as disclosed in the Company's 2022 Form 10-K. See also Note 8, Long-term Debt and Finance Leases, and Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies, to this Form 10-Q for a discussion of new commitments and contingencies that also include contractual obligations and market commitments that occurred during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
The following table reflects the changes in cash flows for the comparative three month periods:
Changes to cash (used)/provided by operating activities were driven by:
Changes to cash (used)/provided by investing activities were driven by:
Changes to cash provided/(used) by financing activities were driven by:
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company had domestic pre-tax book loss of $1.5 billion and foreign pre-tax book loss of $168 million. As of December 31, 2022, the Company had cumulative U.S. Federal NOL carryforwards of $8.2 billion, which do not have an expiration date, and cumulative state NOL carryforwards of $5.3 billion for financial statement purposes. NRG also has cumulative foreign NOL carryforwards of $382 million, most of which do not have an expiration date. In addition to the above NOLs, NRG has a $270 million indefinite carryforward for interest deductions, as well as $393 million of tax credits to be utilized in future years. As of March 31, 2023, additional federal and state NOLs of $2.1 billion and $1.8 billion, respectively, as well as federal carryforward for interest deductions of $739 million, were added with the acquisition of Vivint. As a result of the Company's tax position, including the utilization of federal and state NOLs, and based on current forecasts, the Company anticipates net income tax payments due to federal, state and foreign jurisdictions of up to $66 million in 2023.As of March 31, 2023, the Company has $41 million of tax-effected uncertain federal and state tax benefits, for which the Company has recorded a non-current tax liability of $43 million (inclusive of accrued interest) until final resolution is reached with the related taxing authority. The Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal income tax examinations for years prior to 2019. With few exceptions, state and Canadian income tax examinations are no longer open for years prior to 2014.
Net deferred tax balance — As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, NRG recorded a net deferred tax asset, excluding valuation allowance, of $2.8 billion and $2.0 billion, respectively. The Company believes certain state net operating losses may not be realizable under the more-likely-than-not measurement and as such, a valuation allowance was recorded as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022 as discussed below.NOL Carryforwards — As of March 31, 2023, the Company had a tax-effected cumulative U.S. NOLs consisting of carryforwards for federal and state income tax purposes of $1.7 billion and $315 million, respectively. Additional federal and state NOLs of $446 million and $70 million, respectively, were added with the acquisition of Vivint. The Company estimates it will need to generate future taxable income to fully realize the net federal deferred tax asset before the expiration of certain carryforwards commences in 2030. In addition, NRG has tax-effected cumulative foreign NOL carryforwards of $102 million.Valuation Allowance — As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the Company’s tax-effected valuation allowance was $231 million and $224 million, respectively, consisting of state NOL carryforwards and foreign NOL carryforwards. The valuation allowance was recorded based on the assessment of cumulative and forecasted pre-tax book earnings and the future reversal of existing taxable temporary differences.
As of March 31, 2023, the Company's outstanding registered senior notes consisted of $375 million of the 2027 Senior Notes and $821 million of the 2028 Senior Notes as shown in Note 8, Long-term Debt and Finance Leases. These Senior Notes are guaranteed by certain of NRG's current and future 100% owned domestic subsidiaries, or guarantor subsidiaries (the “Guarantors”). See Exhibit 22.1 for a listing of the Guarantors. These guarantees are both joint and several. NRG conducts much of its business through and derives much of its income from its subsidiaries. Therefore, the Company's ability to make required payments with respect to its indebtedness and other obligations depends on the financial results and condition of its subsidiaries and NRG's ability to receive funds from its subsidiaries. There are no restrictions on the ability of any of the Guarantors to transfer funds to NRG. Other subsidiaries of the Company do not guarantee the registered debt securities of either NRG Energy, Inc or the Guarantors (such subsidiaries are referred to as the “Non-Guarantors”). The Non-Guarantors include all of NRG's foreign subsidiaries and certain domestic subsidiaries.The tables below present summarized financial information of NRG Energy, Inc. and the Guarantors in accordance with Rule 3-10 under the SEC's Regulation S-X. The financial information may not necessarily be indicative of results of operations or financial position of NRG Energy, Inc. and the Guarantors in accordance with U.S. GAAP.The following table presents the summarized statement of operations:
(a)Intercompany transactions with Non-Guarantors of $5 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023(b)Intercompany transactions with Non-Guarantors including cost of operations of $45 million and selling, general and administrative of $35 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023The following table presents the summarized balance sheet information:
(a)Includes intercompany receivables due from Non-Guarantors of $96 million as of March 31, 2023(b)Includes intercompany payables due to Non-Guarantors of $14 million as of March 31, 2023
NRG may enter into power purchase and sales contracts, fuel purchase contracts and other energy-related financial instruments to mitigate variability in earnings due to fluctuations in spot market prices and to hedge fuel requirements at power plants or retail load obligations. In order to mitigate interest rate risk associated with the issuance of the Company's variable rate debt, NRG enters into interest rate swap agreements. In addition, in order to mitigate foreign exchange rate risk primarily associated with the purchase of USD denominated natural gas for the Company's Canadian business, NRG enters into foreign exchange contract agreements.Under Vivint Flex Pay, customers pay for smart home products by obtaining financing from a third-party financing provider under the Consumer Financing Program. Vivint pays certain fees to the financing providers and shares in credit losses depending on the credit quality of the customer.NRG's trading activities are subject to limits in accordance with the Company's Risk Management Policy. These contracts are recognized on the balance sheet at fair value and changes in the fair value of these derivative financial instruments are recognized in earnings.The tables below disclose the activities that include both exchange and non-exchange traded contracts accounted for at fair value in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures ("ASC 820"). Specifically, these tables disaggregate realized and unrealized changes in fair value; disaggregate estimated fair values at March 31, 2023, based on their level within the fair value hierarchy defined in ASC 820; and indicate the maturities of contracts at March 31, 2023. For a full discussion of the Company's valuation methodology of its contracts, see Derivative Fair Value Measurements in Note 5, Fair Value of Financial Instruments.
The Company has elected to disclose derivative assets and liabilities on a trade-by-trade basis and does not offset amounts at the counterparty master agreement level. Also, collateral received or posted on the Company's derivative assets or liabilities are recorded on a separate line item on the balance sheet. Consequently, the magnitude of the changes in individual current and non-current derivative assets or liabilities is higher than the underlying credit and market risk of the Company's portfolio. As discussed in Item 3, Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk — Commodity Price Risk, to this Form 10-Q, NRG measures the sensitivity of the Company's portfolio to potential changes in market prices using VaR, a statistical model which attempts to predict risk of loss based on market price and volatility. NRG's risk management policy places a limit on one-day holding period VaR, which limits the Company's net open position. As the Company's trade-by-trade derivative accounting results in a gross-up of the Company's derivative assets and liabilities, the net derivative asset and liability position is a better indicator of NRG's hedging activity. As of March 31, 2023, NRG's net derivative asset was $1.5 billion, a decrease to total fair value of $2.0 billion as compared to December 31, 2022. This decrease was primarily driven by losses in fair value, roll-off of trades that settled during the period, and Vivint contracts acquired during the period.Based on a sensitivity analysis using simplified assumptions, the impact of a $0.50 per MMBtu increase or decrease in natural gas prices across the term of the derivative contracts would result in a change of approximately $1.7 billion in the net value of derivatives as of March 31, 2023.
NRG's discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations are based upon the condensed consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements and related disclosures in compliance with GAAP requires the application of appropriate technical accounting rules and guidance as well as the use of estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. The application of appropriate technical accounting rules and guidance involves judgments regarding future events, including the likelihood of success of particular projects, legal and regulatory challenges, and the fair value of certain assets and liabilities. These judgments, in and of themselves, could materially affect the financial statements and disclosures based on varying assumptions, which may be appropriate to use. In addition, the financial and operating environment may also have a significant effect, not only on the operation of the business, but on the results reported through the application of accounting measures used in preparing the financial statements and related disclosures, even if the nature of the accounting policies has not changed.NRG evaluates these estimates, on an ongoing basis, utilizing historic experience, consultation with experts and other methods the Company considers reasonable. In any event, actual results may differ substantially from the Company's estimates. Any effects on the Company's business, financial position or results of operations resulting from revisions to these estimates are recorded in the period in which the information that gives rise to the revision becomes known.The Company identifies its most critical accounting estimates as those that are the most pervasive and important to the portrayal of the Company's financial position and results of operations, and require the most difficult, subjective and/or complex judgments by management regarding estimates about matters that are inherently uncertain. The Company's critical accounting estimates are described in Part II, Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, in the Company's 2022 Form 10-K. There have been no material changes to the Company's critical accounting estimates since the 2022 Form 10-K.