
Certain statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q constitute forward-looking statements, including statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In addition, from time to time, the Company or its representatives have made, or may make, forward-looking statements, orally or in writing. These statements may discuss goals, intentions and expectations as to future plans, trends, events, results of operations or financial position, or otherwise, based on current beliefs of the Company’s management as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Forward-looking statements may be accompanied by words such as “aim,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “plan,” “could,” “should,” “would,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “future,” “guidance,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project” or similar words, phrases or expressions. These forward-looking statements are subject to various risks and uncertainties, many of which are outside the Company’s control. Therefore, you should not place undue reliance on such statements. Factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements include: •adverse economic conditions, including those caused by the war in Ukraine, the lingering effects of COVID-19, high and     persistent inflation in countries that comprise our major markets, rising interest rates, and supply chain issues affecting the     distribution of our clients’ products; •international, national or local economic conditions that could adversely affect the Company or its clients; •losses on media purchases and production costs incurred on behalf of clients; •reductions in client spending, a slowdown in client payments and a deterioration or a disruption in the credit markets; •the ability to attract new clients and retain existing clients in the manner anticipated; •changes in client advertising, marketing and corporate communications requirements; •failure to manage potential conflicts of interest between or among clients; •unanticipated changes related to competitive factors in the advertising, marketing and corporate communications                                   industries; •the ability to hire and retain key personnel; •currency exchange rate fluctuations; •reliance on information technology systems; •changes in legislation or governmental regulations affecting the Company or its clients; •risks associated with assumptions the Company makes in connection with its critical accounting estimates and legal                      proceedings; •the Company’s international operations, which are subject to the risks of currency repatriation restrictions, social or         political conditions and regulatory environment; and•risks related to our environmental, social and governance goals and initiatives, including impacts from regulators and                   other stakeholders, and the impact of factors outside of our control on such goals and initiatives. The foregoing list of factors is not exhaustive. You should carefully consider the foregoing factors and the other risks and uncertainties that may affect the Company’s business, including those described in Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, or 2022 10-K, and in Item 2, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in this report. Except as required under applicable law, the Company does not assume any obligation to update these forward-looking statements.
Given our size and breadth, we manage our business by monitoring several financial indicators. The key performance indicators we focus on are revenue growth, operating income, and EBITA (defined as earnings before interest, taxes and amortization of intangible assets) and EBITA margin (defined as EBITA divided by revenue). We analyze revenue growth by reviewing the components and mix of the growth, including growth by regional market, practice area and marketing discipline, the impact from foreign currency exchange rate changes, growth from acquisitions, net of dispositions, and growth from our largest clients. Variability in operating expenses is analyzed in the following categories: cost of services, selling, general and administrative expenses, or SG&A, and depreciation and amortization.
Revenue for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 increased slightly to $3,443.3 million, compared to $3,410.3 million in the prior year quarter. Organic revenue growth (defined below) increased $178.7 million, or 5.2%, primarily reflecting increased client spending in all our disciplines and across all our geographic markets compared to the prior year period. Changes in foreign exchange rates reduced revenue $110.0 million, or 3.2%, primarily due to weakening of the British Pound and the Euro against the U.S. Dollar, and acquisition revenue, net of disposition revenue, reduced revenue $35.7 million, or 1.0%. The reduction in acquisition revenue, net of disposition revenue, primarily reflects dispositions in the Execution & Support discipline in the first quarter of 2023 and the disposition of our businesses in Russia in the first quarter of 2022, partially offset by acquisitions in the Precision Marketing discipline in the first quarter of 2022.  The change in revenue in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the prior year period in our fundamental disciplines was: Advertising & Media increased $6.3 million, Precision Marketing increased $20.8 million, Commerce & Brand Consulting decreased $1.8 million, Experiential increased $8.1 million, Execution & Support decreased $21.5 million, Public Relations increased $13.1 million and Healthcare increased $8.0 million.The change in revenue across our geographic markets was: North America increased $87.8 million, or 4.8%, Latin America increased $6.3 million, or 9.3%, Europe decreased $40.1 million, or 4.0%, the Middle East and Africa increased $3.0 million, or 3.7%, and Asia-Pacific decreased $24.0 million, or 5.6%. A summary of our consolidated results of operations for the three-month periods ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 is:
1) See Non-GAAP reconciliation for the calculation of EBITA on page 22.2) First quarter 2023 operating expenses include $119.2 million ($91.0 million after tax), related to real estate repositioning costs discussed below, which reduced diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. by $0.45. 3) First quarter 2022 operating expenses include $113.4 million  ($118.2 million after tax), related to charges arising from the effects of the war in Ukraine, which reduced diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. by $0.56.
Omnicom is a strategic holding company providing advertising, marketing, and corporate communications services to many of the largest global companies. Our portfolio of companies includes our global networks, BBDO, DDB, TBWA, Omnicom Media Group, the DAS Group of Companies, and the Communications Consultancy Network. All of our global networks integrate their service offerings with the Omnicom branded practice areas, including the Omnicom Health Group, the Omnicom Precision Marketing Group, the Omnicom Commerce Group, the Omnicom Advertising Collective, the Omnicom Public Relations Group, and the Omnicom Brand Consulting Group, as well as our Experiential businesses and Execution & Support businesses, which includes the Omnicom Specialty Marketing Group.On a global, pan-regional, and local basis, our networks, practice areas, and agencies provide a comprehensive range of services in the following fundamental disciplines: Advertising & Media, Precision Marketing, Commerce & Brand Consulting, Experiential, Execution & Support, Public Relations, and Healthcare. Advertising & Media includes creative services across digital and traditional media, strategic media planning and buying, performance media, and data analytics services. Precision Marketing includes digital and direct marketing, digital transformation consulting and data and analytics. Commerce & Brand Consulting services include brand and product consulting, strategy and research, retail, and ecommerce. Experiential marketing services include live and digital events and experience design and execution. Execution & Support includes field marketing, digital and physical merchandising, point-of-sale, product placement, as well as other specialized marketing and custom communications services. Public Relations services include corporate communications, crisis management, public affairs, and media and media relations services. Healthcare includes corporate communications and advertising and media services to global healthcare and pharmaceutical companies. Our geographic markets include the Americas, which includes North America and Latin America, Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA), and Asia Pacific.Our business model was built and continues to evolve around our clients. While our networks, practice areas, and agencies operate under different names and frame their ideas in different disciplines, we organize our services around our clients. Our fundamental business principle is that our clients’ specific marketing requirements are the central focus of how we structure our service offerings and allocate our resources. This client-centric business model requires multiple agencies within Omnicom to collaborate in formal and informal virtual client networks utilizing our key client matrix organization structure. This collaboration allows us to cut across our internal organizational structures to execute our clients’ marketing requirements consistently and comprehensively. We use our client-centric approach to grow our business by expanding our service offerings to existing clients, moving into new markets, and obtaining new clients. In addition, we pursue selective acquisitions of complementary companies with strong entrepreneurial management teams that currently serve or could serve our existing clients. In addition to collaborating through our client service models, our agencies and networks collaborate across internally developed technology platforms. Annalect and Omni, our proprietary data and analytics platforms, are the strategic resource for all our agencies and networks to share when developing client service strategies across our virtual networks. These platforms provide precision marketing and insights at scale across creative, media, and other disciplines.As a leading global advertising, marketing and corporate communications company, we operate in all major markets and have a large and diverse client base. For the twelve months ended March 31, 2023, our largest client accounted for 2.7% of our revenue, and our 100 largest clients, which represent many of the world's major marketers, accounted for approximately 52.7% of our revenue. Our clients operate in virtually every sector of the global economy with no one industry representing more than 17% of our revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023. Although our revenue is generally balanced between the United States and international markets, and we have a large and diverse client base, we are not immune to general economic downturns.
Current global economic challenges, including the impact of the war in Ukraine, high and persistent inflation, rising interest rates, supply chain disruptions, credit market deterioration, and other macroeconomic factors, could cause economic uncertainty and volatility. The impact of these issues on our business will vary by geographic market and discipline. We closely monitor economic conditions, client revenue levels and other factors. In response to reductions in revenue, we can take actions to align our cost structure with changes in client demand and manage our working capital. However, there can be no assurance as to the effectiveness of our efforts to mitigate any impact of the current and future adverse economic conditions, reductions in client revenue, changes in client creditworthiness, and other developments. Revenue is typically lower in the first and third quarters and higher in the second and fourth quarters, reflecting client spending patterns during the year and additional project work that usually occurs in the fourth quarter. Certain global events targeted by major marketers for advertising expenditures, such as the FIFA World Cup and the Olympics, and certain national events, such as the U.S. election process, may affect our revenue period-over-period in certain businesses. Typically, these events do not have a significant impact on our revenue in any period.
The results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended  March 31, 2022 were:
1) First quarter 2023 operating expenses include $119.2 million ($91.0 million after tax), related to real estate repositioning costs discussed below, which reduced diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. by $0.45. 2) First quarter 2022 operating expenses include $113.4 million  ($118.2 million after tax), related to the charge arising from the effects of the war in Ukraine, which reduced diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. by $0.56.
The components of revenue change for thethree months ended March 31, 2023 in the United States (“Domestic”) and the remainder of the world (“International”) were:
The components and percentages are calculated as follows:•Foreign exchange rate impact is calculated by translating the current period’s local currency revenue using the prior period average exchange rates to derive current period constant currency revenue (in this case $3,553.3 million for the Total column). The foreign exchange impact is the difference between the current period revenue in U.S. Dollars and the current period constant currency revenue ($3,443.3 million less $3,553.3 million for the Total column).•Acquisition revenue is calculated as if the acquisition occurred twelve months prior to the acquisition date by aggregating the comparable prior period revenue of acquisitions through the acquisition date. As a result, acquisition revenue excludes the positive or negative difference between our current period revenue subsequent to the acquisition date and the comparable prior period revenue and the positive or negative growth after the acquisition is attributed to organic growth. Disposition revenue is calculated as if the disposition occurred twelve months prior to the disposition date by aggregating the comparable prior period revenue of dispositions through the disposition date. The acquisition revenue and disposition revenue amounts are netted in the table.•Organic growth is calculated by subtracting the foreign exchange rate impact, and the acquisition revenue, net of disposition revenue components from total revenue growth.•The percentage change is calculated by dividing the individual component amount by the prior period revenue base of that component ($3,410.3 million for the Total column).Changes in the value of foreign currencies against the U.S. Dollar affect our results of operations and financial position. For the most part, because the revenue and expense of our foreign operations are both denominated in the same local currency, the economic impact on operating margin is minimized. Assuming exchange rates at April 14, 2023 remain unchanged, we expect the impact of changes in foreign exchange rates to reduce revenue in the second quarter by approximately 0.5% and to be flat for the year. Based on our acquisition and disposition activity through April 14, 2023 we expect that the net impact will reduce revenue by 1.0% for the second quarter of 2023 and 1.0% for the full year.
To monitor the changing needs of our clients and to further expand the scope of our services to key clients, we monitor revenue across a broad range of disciplines and group them into the following categories: Advertising & Media, Precision Marketing, Commerce & Brand Consulting, Experiential, Execution & Support, Public Relations, and Healthcare.The change in revenue period-over-period and organic growth by discipline was:
Effective January 1, 2023, we realigned the classification of certain services primarily within our Commerce & Brand Consulting, Execution & Support, and Experiential disciplines.The change in revenue in the first quarter of 2023 compared to the first quarter of 2022 in our fundamental disciplines was: Advertising & Media increased $6.3 million, Precision Marketing increased $20.8 million, Commerce & Brand Consulting decreased $1.8 million, Experiential increased $8.1 million, Execution & Support decreased $21.5 million, Public Relations increased $13.1 million and Healthcare increased $8.0 million. Organic revenue increased across all our disciplines and was partially offset by the weakening of substantially all foreign currencies against the U.S. Dollar, primarily the British Pound and the Euro, and by dispositions, primarily in the Execution & Support discipline in the first quarter of 2023 and in the Advertising & Media discipline, including the disposition of our businesses in Russia in the first quarter of 2022.In the normal course of business, our agencies both gain and lose business from clients each year due to a variety of factors. Under our client-centric approach, we seek to broaden our relationships with all of our clients. Our largest client represented 2.7% and 3.3% of revenue for the twelve months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Our ten largest and 100 largest clients represented 19.3% and 52.7% of revenue for the twelve months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, and 21.1% and 54.2% of revenue for the twelve months ended March 31, 2022, respectively.
The change in revenue period-over-period and organic growth in our geographic markets was:
The change in revenue across our geographic markets was: North America increased $87.8 million, or 4.8%, Latin America increased $6.3 million, or 9.3%, Europe decreased $40.1 million, or 4.0%, the Middle East and Africa increased $3.0 million, or 3.7%, and Asia-Pacific decreased $24.0 million, or 5.6%.Organic revenue increased across all of our geographic markets. In North America, increased organic revenue was driven primarily by strong performance in the United States across substantially all our disciplines, especially Advertising & Media, led by our media business, Precision Marketing, Public Relations, Healthcare, and Execution & Support, and was partially offset by the weakening of the Canadian Dollar against the U.S. Dollar.In Latin America, organic revenue increased in substantially all our disciplines, led by Advertising & Media, and in most countries, especially in Brazil, Chile and Mexico, was partially offset by the weakening of the Colombian Peso against the U.S. Dollar.In Europe, organic revenue increased in substantially all our major geographic markets and substantially all disciplines, especially Advertising & Media, led by our media business, Public Relations, Healthcare, Precision Marketing, and Experiential. The organic revenue growth was offset by the weakening of most currencies in the region, especially the British Pound and the Euro, against the U.S. Dollar, and the disposition of our businesses in Russia in the first quarter of 2022. In the U.K., organic revenue growth of 5.9% was led by our Advertising & Media, Healthcare, Commerce & Brand Consulting, and Precision Marketing disciplines. In Continental Europe, which includes the Euro Zone and the other European countries, organic growth of 5.4% was led by France, Italy, Spain, and Germany and in substantially all disciplines.In the Middle East and Africa, organic revenue increased period-over-period in all disciplines, led by Advertising & Media and Experiential, and in most of our major markets in the region, and was partially offset by the weakening of certain currencies in the region against the U.S. Dollar.In Asia-Pacific, increased organic revenue was led by our Advertising & Media discipline and most major markets in the region, especially Australia, India, Korea and Japan, and was offset by the weakening of substantially all currencies in the region against the U.S. Dollar, especially the Australian Dollar, Renminbi and Yen, as well as disposition activity in the first quarter of 2022.
Revenue by type of client industry sector was:
Operating expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were:
We measure cost of services in two distinct categories: salary and service costs and occupancy and other costs. As a service business, salary and service costs make up the significant portion of our operating expenses and substantially all these costs comprise the essential components directly linked to the delivery of our services. Salary and service costs include employee compensation and benefits, freelance labor, and third-party service costs, which include third-party supplier costs when we act as principal in providing services to our clients, and third-party incidental costs, which primarily consist of client-related travel and incidental out-of-pocket costs, which we bill back to the client directly at our cost and which we are required to include in revenue. Occupancy and other costs consist of the indirect costs related to the delivery of our services, including office rent and other occupancy costs, equipment rent, technology costs, general office expenses and other expenses. Adverse and beneficial fluctuations in foreign currencies from period to period impact our results of operations and financial position when we translate our financial statements from local foreign currencies to the U.S. Dollar. However, substantially all of our foreign operations transact business in their local currency mitigating the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on our operating margin percentage. Operating expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased slightly to $3,096.8 million from $3,057.3 million period-over-period. The weakening of most foreign currencies, especially the British Pound and Euro, against the U.S. Dollar reduced operating expenses period-over-period and was in line with the percentage impact from changes in foreign currencies on revenue.
Salary and service costs, which tend to fluctuate with changes in revenue, are comprised of salary and related costs, third-party service costs, and third-party incidental costs.  Salary and related costs include employee compensation and benefits costs and freelance labor.  Third-party service costs include third-party supplier costs when we act as principal in providing services to our clients.  Third-party incidental costs primarily consist of client-related travel and incidental out-of-pocket costs that we bill back to the client directly at our cost and which we are required to include in revenue. Salary and service costs increased $51.1 million, or 2.1%, to $2,542.9 million. Salary and related costs decreased $16.6 million, or 0.9%, to $1,778.0 million. While headcount increased as a result of organic growth, the increase was offset by the effects of foreign currency translation. Third-party service costs increased $57.5 million, or 9.9%, to $639.3 million, and third-party incidental costs increased $10.2 million, or 8.8%, to $125.6 million, primarily due to an increase in organic revenue.
Occupancy and other costs, which are less directly linked to changes in revenue than salary and service costs, decreased slightly by $8.6 million. Excluding the impact from changes in foreign currencies, occupancy and other costs were flat period-over-period. In connection with the transition to a flexible working environment, a hybrid model which allows for partial remote work, we took certain actions to reduce and reposition our office lease portfolio. In the three months ended March 31, 2023, we recorded a pretax charge of $119.2 million ($91.0 million after-tax), which included an $80.4 million non-cash impairment charge for the operating lease right-of-use, or ROU, assets, $20.0 million for the write-off of the net book value of leasehold improvements at the affected locations, and $18.8 million of other lease obligations that will be paid in less than one year. Substantially all of the operating lease payments related to the ROU assets will be paid out over three years.
SG&A expenses primarily consist of third-party marketing costs, professional fees and compensation and benefits and occupancy and other costs of our corporate and executive offices, including group-wide finance and accounting, treasury, legal and governance, human resource oversight and similar costs. Excluding the impact from changes in foreign currencies, SG&A expenses remained flat period-over-period.
Operating income decreased $6.5 million to $346.5 million, and operating margin decreased to 10.1% from 10.4% compared to the prior year period. EBITA decreased $6.6 million to $365.8 million and EBITA margin decreased to 10.6% from 10.9%, period-over-period. The effect of the real estate repositioning cost (see Note 9 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements) reduced operating income and EBITA by $119.2 million, and decreased operating margin by 3.4% and EBITA margin by 3.5%. Operating income and EBITA in the first quarter of 2022 include a reduction of $113.4 million related to the war in Ukraine (see Note 10 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements) and decreased both operating margin and EBITA margin by 3.3%.
Net interest expense in the first quarter of 2023 decreased $23.5 million period-over-period to $19.3 million. Interest expense on debt in the quarter increased slightly by $3.2 million period-over-period to $50.2 million. Interest income in the first quarter of 2023 increased $27.4 million period-over-period to $35.6 million, primarily as a result of higher interest rates on cash balances and short-term investments.
Our effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased period-over-period to 25.5% from 37.2%. The decrease for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily reflects the favorable impact of $10.0 million related to previously unrecognized tax benefits, partially offset by $6.0 million related to a lower tax benefit in certain jurisdictions for the real estate repositioning costs in the quarter and the increase in the U.K. statutory tax rate. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was negatively impacted by the non-deductibility of the $113.4 million charges recorded in the first quarter of 2022, arising from the effects of the war in Ukraine, as well as an additional increase in income tax expense of $4.8 million related to the disposition of our businesses in Russia.On August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, or IRA, was signed into law. The IRA levies a 1% excise tax on net stock repurchases after December 31, 2022. The excise tax is included in treasury stock on our balance sheet and was immaterial. Additionally, the IRA imposes a 15% corporate alternative minimum tax, or CAMT, for tax years beginning after December 31, 2022. The CAMT is not expected to have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position.Various foreign jurisdictions are in the process of enacting legislation to adopt a minimum tax described in the Global Anti-Base Erosion, GloBE or Pillar Two, tax model rules issued by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. A minimum effective tax of 15% would apply to multinational companies with consolidated revenue above €750 million. Currently, South Korea and Japan are the only countries to have enacted legislation consistent with the GloBE rules. Other countries are expected to adopt GloBE rules in 2023 with effective dates beginning in 2024.Under the GloBE rules, a company would be required to determine a combined effective tax rate for all entities located in a jurisdiction. If the jurisdictional effective tax rate is less than 15%, a top-up tax generally will be due to bring the jurisdictional effective tax rate up to 15%. The GloBE minimum tax will be accounted for as an alternative minimum tax, or AMT. As such, companies will need to consider the effects beginning in the period that includes the date the GloBE AMT is effective. Changes in tax laws in the various countries in which we operate can negatively impact our results of operations and financial position in future periods.
Net income - Omnicom Group Inc. in the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $53.7 million to $227.5 million from $173.8 million in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The period-over-period increase is due to the factors described above. Diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. increased to $1.11 in the three months ended March 31, 2023, from $0.83 in the three months ended March 31, 2022, due to the factors described above, and by the impact of the reduction in our weighted average common shares outstanding resulting from the repurchases of our common stock during the quarter, net of shares issued for stock option exercises and the employee stock purchase plan. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the impact of the real estate repositioning costs reduced net income - Omnicom Group Inc. by $91.0 million and diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. by $0.45. For the three months ended March 31, 2022, the impact of the after-tax charges arising from the effects of the war in Ukraine reduced net income - Omnicom Group Inc. by $118.2 million and diluted net income per share - Omnicom Group Inc. by $0.56.
We use certain non-GAAP financial measures in describing our performance. We use EBITA and EBITA Margin as additional operating performance measures, which exclude the non-cash amortization expense of intangible assets (primarily consisting of amortization of intangible assets arising from acquisitions). We believe EBITA and EBITA Margin are useful measures for investors to evaluate the performance of our business. Non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information presented in compliance with U.S. GAAP. Non-GAAP financial measures reported by us may not be comparable to similarly titled amounts reported by other companies.
The following table reconciles the U.S. GAAP financial measure of Net Income- Omnicom Group Inc. to EBITA and EBITA Margin:
Primary sources of our short-term liquidity are our operating cash flow, cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. Additional liquidity sources include our $2.5 billion multi-currency revolving credit facility, or Credit Facility, with a termination date of February 14, 2025, the ability to issue up to $2 billion of U.S. Dollar denominated commercial paper and issue up to the equivalent of $500 million in British Pounds or Euro under a Euro commercial paper program, and access to the capital markets. Certain of our international subsidiaries have uncommitted credit lines that are guaranteed by Omnicom aggregating $588.5 million. Our liquidity sources fund our non-discretionary cash requirements and our discretionary spending.Working capital, which we define as current assets minus current liabilities, is our principal non-discretionary funding requirement. Our working capital cycle typically peaks during the second quarter of the year due to the timing of payments for incentive compensation, income taxes and contingent purchase price obligations. In addition, we have contractual obligations related to our long-term debt (principal and interest payments), recurring business operations, primarily related to lease obligations, and acquisition related obligations. Our principal discretionary cash spending includes dividend payments to common shareholders, capital expenditures, strategic acquisitions and repurchases of our common stock.Cash and cash equivalents decreased $1.0 billion from December 31, 2022. During the first quarter of 2023, we used $522.1 million of cash in operating activities, which included the use for operating capital of $951.0 million, primarily related to our typical working capital requirement during the period. Discretionary spending for the first quarter of 2023 was $495.1 million as compared to $822.3 million for the prior year period. Discretionary spending for the first quarter of 2023 is comprised of capital expenditures of $23.1 million, dividends paid to common shareholders of $142.3 million, dividends paid to shareholders of noncontrolling interests of $12.5 million, repurchases of our common stock, net of proceeds from stock option exercises and related tax benefits and common stock sold to our employee stock purchase plan of $278.8 million, and payment of contingent purchase price obligations and acquisition of additional shares of noncontrolling interests of $38.4 million. The impact of foreign exchange rate changes increased cash and cash equivalents by $18.4 million.Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments and operating cash flow will be sufficient to meet our non-discretionary cash requirements for the next twelve months. Over the longer term, our Credit Facility is available to fund our working capital and contractual obligations.
Our regional treasury centers in North America, Europe and Asia manage our cash and liquidity. Each day, operations with excess funds invest those funds with their regional treasury center. Likewise, operations that require funds borrow from their regional treasury center. Treasury centers with excess cash invest on a short-term basis with third parties, generally with maturities ranging from overnight to less than 90 days. Certain treasury centers have notional pooling arrangements that are used to manage their cash and set-off foreign exchange imbalances. The arrangements require each treasury center to have its own notional pool account and to maintain a notional positive account balance. Additionally, under the terms of the arrangement, set-off of foreign exchange positions are limited to the long and short positions within their own account. To the extent that our treasury centers require liquidity, they have the ability to issue up to a total of $2 billion of U.S. Dollar-denominated commercial paper and issue up to the equivalent of $500 million in British Pounds or Euro under a Euro commercial paper program, or borrow under the Credit Facility or the uncommitted credit lines. This process enables us to manage our debt more efficiently and utilize our cash more effectively, as well as manage our risk to foreign exchange rate imbalances. In countries where we either do not conduct treasury operations or it is not feasible for one of our treasury centers to fund net borrowing requirements on an intercompany basis, we arrange for local currency uncommitted credit lines. We have a policy governing counterparty credit risk with financial institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents and we have deposit limits for each institution. In countries where we conduct treasury operations, generally the counterparties are either branches or subsidiaries of institutions that are party to the Credit Facility. These institutions generally have credit ratings equal to or better than our credit ratings. In countries where we do not conduct treasury operations, all cash and cash equivalents are held by counterparties that meet specific minimum credit standards.At March 31, 2023, our foreign subsidiaries held approximately $1.6 billion of our total cash and cash equivalents of $3.3 billion. Substantially all of the cash is available to us, net of any foreign withholding taxes payable upon repatriation to the United States. At March 31, 2023, our net debt position, which we define as total debt, including short-term debt, less cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments increased $1.0 billion to $2.3 billion from December 31, 2022. The increase in net debt primarily resulted from the use of cash of $522.1 million for operating activities, which included the use for operating capital of $951.0 million, primarily related to our typical working capital requirement during the period, and discretionary spending of $495.1 million, partially offset by an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $18.4 million from the changes in foreign exchange rates.
The components of net debt were:
Net debt is a Non-GAAP liquidity measure. This presentation, together with the comparable U.S. GAAP liquidity measures, reflects one of the key metrics used by us to assess our cash management. Non-GAAP liquidity measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information presented in compliance with U.S. GAAP. Non-GAAP liquidity measures as reported by us may not be comparable to similarly titled amounts reported by other companies.
Our 2.45% Senior Notes due 2030, 4.20% Senior Notes due 2030 and 2.60% Senior Notes due 2031 are senior unsecured obligations of Omnicom that rank equal in right of payment with all existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness.Omnicom and its wholly owned finance subsidiary, Omnicom Capital Inc., or OCI, are co-obligors under our 3.65% Senior Notes due 2024 and 3.60% Senior Notes due 2026. These notes are a joint and several liability of Omnicom and OCI, and Omnicom unconditionally guarantees OCI’s obligations with respect to the notes. OCI provides funding for our operations by incurring debt and lending the proceeds to our operating subsidiaries. OCI’s assets primarily consist of cash and cash equivalents and intercompany loans made to our operating subsidiaries, and the related interest receivable. There are no restrictions on the ability of OCI or Omnicom to obtain funds from our subsidiaries through dividends, loans or advances. Such notes are senior unsecured obligations that rank equal in right of payment with all existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness.Omnicom and OCI have, jointly and severally, fully and unconditionally guaranteed the obligations of Omnicom Finance Holdings plc, or OFH, a U.K.-based wholly owned subsidiary of Omnicom, with respect to the €500 million 0.80% Senior Notes due 2027 and the €500 million 1.40% Senior Notes due 2031,  collectively the Euro Notes. OFH’s assets consist of its investments in several wholly owned finance companies that function as treasury centers, providing funding for various operating companies in Europe, Australia and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region. The finance companies’ assets consist of cash and cash equivalents and intercompany loans that they make or have made to the operating companies in their respective regions and the related interest receivable. There are no restrictions on the ability of Omnicom, OCI or OFH to obtain funds from their subsidiaries through dividends, loans or advances. The Euro Notes and the related guarantees are senior unsecured obligations that rank equal in right of payment with all existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness of OFH and each of Omnicom and OCI, respectively. Omnicom has fully and unconditionally guaranteed the obligations of Omnicom Capital Holdings plc, or OCH, a U.K.-based wholly owned subsidiary of Omnicom, with respect to the £325 million 2.25% Senior Notes due 2033, or the Sterling Notes. OCH’s assets consist of its investments in several wholly owned finance companies that function as treasury centers, providing funding for various operating companies in EMEA, Australia and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region. The finance companies’ assets consist of cash and cash equivalents and intercompany loans that they make or have made to the operating companies in their respective regions and the related interest receivable. There are no restrictions on the ability of Omnicom or OCH to obtain funds from their subsidiaries through dividends, loans or advances. The Sterling Notes and the related guarantee are senior unsecured obligations that rank equal in right of payment with all existing and future unsecured senior indebtedness of OCH and Omnicom, respectively.The Credit Facility contains a financial covenant that requires us to maintain a Leverage Ratio of consolidated indebtedness to consolidated EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization and non-cash charges) of no more than 3.5 times for the most recently ended 12-month period. At March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with this covenant as our Leverage Ratio was 2.4 times. The Credit Facility does not limit our ability to declare or pay dividends or repurchase our common stock.Borrowings under the Credit Facility may use LIBOR as the benchmark interest rate. The LIBOR benchmark rate is expected to be phased out by June 2023. We do not expect that the discontinuation of the LIBOR rate will have a material impact on our liquidity or results of operations.At March 31, 2023, our long-term and short-term debt was rated BBB+ and A2 by S&P and Baa1 and P2 by Moody's. Our access to the commercial paper market and the cost of these borrowings are affected by market conditions and our credit ratings. The long-term debt indentures and the Credit Facility do not contain provisions that require acceleration of cash payments in the event of a downgrade in our credit ratings.
In light of the uncertainty of future economic conditions, we will continue to take actions available to us to respond to changing economic conditions, and we will continue to manage our discretionary expenditures. We will continue to monitor and manage the level of credit made available to our clients. We believe that these actions, in addition to the availability of our Credit Facility, are sufficient to fund our near-term working capital needs and our discretionary spending. Information regarding our Credit Facility is provided in Note 5 to the unaudited consolidated financial statements. We have the ability to fund our day-to-day liquidity, including working capital, by issuing commercial paper or borrowing under the Credit Facility. During the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, there were no issuances of commercial paper or borrowings under the Credit Facility. We can resume issuing commercial paper to fund our day-to-day liquidity when needed. However, disruptions in the credit markets may lead to periods of illiquidity in the commercial paper market and higher credit spreads. To mitigate any disruption in the credit markets and to fund our liquidity, we may borrow under the Credit Facility or the uncommitted credit lines or access the capital markets if favorable conditions exist. We will continue to monitor closely our liquidity and conditions in the credit markets. We cannot predict with any certainty the impact on us of any disruptions in the credit markets. In such circumstances, we may need to obtain additional financing to fund our day-to-day working capital requirements. Such additional financing may not be available on favorable terms, or at all.
We provide advertising, marketing and corporate communications services to several thousand clients that operate in nearly every sector of the global economy and we grant credit to qualified clients in the normal course of business. Due to the diversified nature of our client base, we do not believe that we are exposed to a concentration of credit risk as our largest client represented 2.7% and 3.3% of revenue for the twelve months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. However, during periods of economic downturn, the credit profiles of our clients could change.In the normal course of business, our agencies enter into contractual commitments with media providers and production companies on behalf of our clients at levels that can substantially exceed the revenue from our services. These commitments are included in accounts payable when the services are delivered by the media providers or production companies. If permitted by local law and the client agreement, many of our agencies purchase media and production services for our clients as an agent for a disclosed principal. In addition, while operating practices vary by country, media type and media vendor, in the United States and certain foreign markets, many of our agencies’ contracts with media and production providers specify that our agencies are not liable to the media and production providers under the theory of sequential liability until and to the extent we have been paid by our client for the media or production services.Where purchases of media and production services are made by our agencies as a principal or are not subject to the theory of sequential liability, the risk of a material loss as a result of payment default by our clients could increase significantly and such a loss could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations and financial position.In addition, our methods of managing the risk of payment default, including obtaining credit insurance, requiring payment in advance, mitigating the potential loss in the marketplace or negotiating with media providers, may be insufficient, less available, or unavailable during a severe economic downturn.
For a more complete understanding of our accounting estimates and policies, the unaudited consolidated financial statements and the related Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, readers are encouraged to consider this information together with our discussion of our critical accounting policies under the heading “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.