
Unless otherwise indicated, “we,” “us,” “our,” and similar terms, as well as references to the “Company” or “O’Reilly,” refer to O’Reilly Automotive, Inc. and its subsidiaries.In Management’s Discussion and Analysis, we provide a historical and prospective narrative of our general financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results, including●an overview of the key drivers and other influences on the automotive aftermarket industry;●our results of operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022;●our liquidity and capital resources;●our critical accounting estimates; and●recent accounting pronouncements that may affect our Company.
We claim the protection of the safe-harbor for forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.  You can identify these statements by forward-looking words such as “estimate,” “may,” “could,” “will,” “believe,” “expect,” “would,” “consider,” “should,” “anticipate,” “project,” “plan,” “intend,” or similar words.  In addition, statements contained within this quarterly report that are not historical facts are forward-looking statements, such as statements discussing, among other things, expected growth, store development, integration and expansion strategy, business strategies, future revenues, and future performance.  These forward-looking statements are based on estimates, projections, beliefs, and assumptions and are not guarantees of future events and results.  Such statements are subject to risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, including, but not limited to, the economy in general; inflation; consumer debt levels; product demand; a public health crisis; the market for auto parts; competition; weather; tariffs; availability of key products and supply chain disruptions; business interruptions, including terrorist activities, war and the threat of war; failure to protect our brand and reputation; challenges in international markets; volatility of the market price of our common stock; our increased debt levels; credit ratings on public debt; historical growth rate sustainability; our ability to hire and retain qualified employees; risks associated with the performance of acquired businesses; damage, failure or interruption of information technology systems, including information security and cyber-attacks; and governmental regulations.  Actual results may materially differ from anticipated results described or implied in these forward-looking statements.  Please refer to the “Risk Factors” section of our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, and subsequent Securities and Exchange Commission filings, for additional factors that could materially affect our financial performance.  Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they were made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise, except as required by applicable law.
We are a specialty retailer of automotive aftermarket parts, tools, supplies, equipment, and accessories in the United States, Puerto Rico, and Mexico.  We are one of the largest U.S. automotive aftermarket specialty retailers, selling our products to both DIY customers and professional service providers – our “dual market strategy.”  Our goal is to achieve growth in sales and profitability by capitalizing on our competitive advantages, such as our dual market strategy, superior customer service provided by well-trained and technically proficient Team Members, and strategic distribution and hub store network that provides same day and over-night inventory access for our stores to offer a broad selection of product offerings.  The successful execution of our growth strategy includes aggressively opening new stores, growing sales in existing stores, continually enhancing merchandising and store layouts, and implementing our Omnichannel initiatives.  As of March 31, 2023, we operated 5,986 stores in 48 U.S. states and Puerto Rico and 43 stores in Mexico.    The extensive product line offered in our stores consists of new and remanufactured automotive hard parts, maintenance items, accessories, a complete line of auto body paint and related materials, automotive tools, and professional service provider service equipment.  Our extensive product line includes an assortment of products that are differentiated by quality and price for most of the product lines we offer.  For many of our product offerings, this quality differentiation reflects “good,” “better,” and “best” alternatives.  Our sales and total gross profit dollars are, generally, highest for the “best” quality category of products.  Consumers’ willingness to select products at a higher point on the value spectrum is a driver of enhanced sales and profitability in our industry.  We have ongoing initiatives focused on marketing and training to educate customers on the advantages of ongoing vehicle maintenance, as well as “purchasing up” on the value spectrum.
​Our stores also offer enhanced services and programs to our customers, including used oil, oil filter, and battery recycling; battery, wiper, and bulb replacement; battery diagnostic testing; electrical and module testing; check engine light code extraction; loaner tool program; drum and rotor resurfacing; custom hydraulic hoses; professional paint shop mixing and related materials; and machine shops. ​Our business is influenced by a number of general macroeconomic factors that impact both our industry and consumers, including, but not limited to, inflation, including rising consumer staples; fuel and energy costs; unemployment trends; interest rates; and other economic factors.  Future changes, such as continued broad-based inflation and rapid increases in fuel costs that exceed wage growth, may negatively impact our consumers’ level of disposable income, and we cannot predict the degree these changes, or other future changes, may have on our business or industry. ​We believe the key drivers of demand over the long-term for the products sold within the automotive aftermarket include the number of U.S. miles driven, number of U.S. registered vehicles, annual rate of light vehicle sales, and average vehicle age. ​Number of Miles Driven The number of total miles driven in the U.S. influences the demand for repair and maintenance products sold within the automotive aftermarket.  In total, vehicles in the U.S. are driven approximately three trillion miles per year, resulting in ongoing wear and tear and a corresponding continued demand for the repair and maintenance products necessary to keep these vehicles in operation.  According to the U.S. Department of Transportation, the number of total miles driven in the U.S. decreased 13.2% in 2020, as a result of responses to the coronavirus pandemic, including work from home arrangements and reduced travel.  Miles driven improved and increased 11.2% in 2021, and continued to improve and increased 0.9% in 2022, and year-to-date through February of 2023, miles driven have increased 3.8%.  Total miles driven can be impacted by macroeconomic factors, including rapid increases in fuel cost, but we are unable to predict the degree of impact these factors may have on miles driven in the future.  ​Size and Age of the Vehicle Fleet The total number of vehicles on the road and the average age of the vehicle population heavily influence the demand for products sold within the automotive aftermarket industry.  As reported by the Auto Care Association, the total number of registered vehicles increased 12.1% from 2011 to 2021, bringing the number of light vehicles on the road to 279 million by the end of 2021.  In 2022, the rate of new vehicle sales was pressured due to supply chain constraints experienced by manufacturers, and the seasonally adjusted annual rate of light vehicle sales in the U.S. (“SAAR”) was below the historical average at approximately 13.3 million vehicles for the year ended December 31, 2022.  The degree to which potential supply chain constraints may affect new vehicle production capacity in 2023 is difficult to determine, with the current 2023 outlook for the SAAR estimated to be approximately 14.8 million vehicles, which again remains below the historical average.  From 2011 to 2021, vehicle scrappage rates have remained relatively stable, ranging from 4.1% to 5.7% annually.  As a result, over the past decade, the average age of the U.S. vehicle population has increased, growing 11.0%, from 10.9 years in 2011 to 12.1 years in 2021.  While the annual changes to the vehicle population resulting from new vehicle sales and the fluctuation in vehicle scrappage rates in any given year represent a small percentage of the total light vehicle population and have a muted impact on the total number and average age of vehicles on the road over the short term, we believe our business benefits from the current environment of elevated new and used vehicle prices, as consumers are more willing to continue to invest in their current vehicle.  ​We believe the increase in average vehicle age over the long term can be attributed to better engineered and manufactured vehicles, which can be reliably driven at higher mileages due to better quality power trains, interiors and exteriors, and the consumer’s willingness to invest in maintaining these higher-mileage, better built vehicles.  As the average age of vehicles on the road increases, a larger percentage of miles are being driven by vehicles that are outside of a manufacturer warranty.  These out-of-warranty, older vehicles generate strong demand for automotive aftermarket products as they go through more routine maintenance cycles, have more frequent mechanical failures, and generally require more maintenance than newer vehicles.  We believe consumers will continue to invest in these reliable, higher-quality, higher-mileage vehicles, and these investments, along with an increasing total light vehicle fleet, will support continued demand for automotive aftermarket products.​Inflationary cost pressures impact our business; however, historically we have been successful, in many cases, in reducing the effects of merchandise cost increases, principally by taking advantage of supplier incentive programs, economies of scale resulting from increased volume of purchases and selective forward buying.  To the extent our acquisition costs increase due to base commodity price increases or other input cost increases affecting the entire industry, we have typically been able to pass along these cost increases through higher selling prices for the affected products.  As a result, we do not believe inflation has had a material adverse effect on our operations. ​To some extent, our business is seasonal, primarily as a result of the impact of weather conditions on customer buying patterns.  While we have historically realized operating profits in each quarter of the year, our store sales and profits have historically been higher in the second and third quarters (April through September) than in the first and fourth quarters (October through March) of the year.​17We remain confident in our ability to gain market share in our existing markets and grow our business in new markets by focusing on our dual market strategy and the core O’Reilly values of hard work and excellent customer service.    ​RESULTS OF OPERATIONS​Sales:Sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased $412 million, or 12%, to $3.71 billion from $3.30 billion for the same period one year ago.  Comparable store sales for stores open at least one year increased 10.8% and 4.8% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.  Comparable store sales are calculated based on the change in sales for U.S. stores open at least one year and exclude sales of specialty machinery, sales to independent parts stores, and sales to Team Members.  Online sales for ship-to-home orders and pickup in-store orders for U.S. stores open at least one year are included in the comparable store sales calculation. We opened 58 and 54 net, new stores during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.  We anticipate total new store growth to be 180 to 190 net, new store openings in 2023.  ​The increase in sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily the result of the 10.8% increase in domestic comparable store sales and a $68 million increase in sales from new stores opened in 2022 and 2023 that are not yet considered comparable stores.  Our comparable store sales increase for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was driven by increases in average ticket values for both professional service provider and DIY customers and positive transaction counts from professional service provider customers, partially offset by negative transaction counts from DIY customers.  Average ticket values benefited from increases in average selling prices, on a same-SKU basis, as compared to the same period in 2022, driven by increases in acquisition costs of inventory, which were passed on in selling prices.  Average ticket values also continue to be positively impacted by the increasing complexity and cost of replacement parts necessary to maintain the current population of better-engineered and more technically advanced vehicles.  These better-engineered, more technically advanced vehicles require less frequent repairs, as the component parts are more durable and last for longer periods of time.  The resulting decrease in repair frequency creates pressure on customer transaction counts; however, when repairs are needed, the cost of replacement parts is, on average, greater, which is a benefit to average ticket values.  The increase in professional service provider customer transaction counts was driven by consistently exceptional execution of our strategies surrounding superior service, inventory availability, and competitive pricing.  The decrease in DIY customer transaction counts was driven by broader industry dynamics on reduced repair frequency from better engineered parts, as well as pressure from the timing of the onset of spring weather. ​See Note 10 “Revenue” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further information concerning our sales.​Gross profit:Gross profit for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 11% to $1.89 billion (or 51.0% of sales) from $1.71 billion (or 51.8% of sales) for the same period one year ago.  The increase in gross profit dollars for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily the result of new store sales and the increase in comparable store sales at existing stores.  The decrease in gross profit as a percentage of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily due to the impact of the rollout of our professional pricing initiative in the middle of the first quarter of 2022, which was a strategic investment aimed at ensuring we are more competitively priced on the professional side of our business, a greater percentage of our total sales mix being generated from professional service provider customers, which carry a lower gross margin than DIY sales, and a benefit in the prior year from selling through inventory purchased prior to recent acquisition cost increases and corresponding selling price increases. ​Selling, general and administrative expenses:Selling, general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”) for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 13% to $1.17 billion (or 31.7% of sales) from $1.04 billion (or 31.5% of sales) for the same period one year ago.  The increase in total SG&A dollars for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily the result of the resumption of our annual-in person leadership conference, our transition to an enhanced paid time-off program for our Team Members, and additional Team Members, facilities, and vehicles to support our increased sales and store count.  The increase in SG&A as a percentage of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was principally due to costs associated with our leadership conference and our enhanced paid time-off program.     ​Operating income:As a result of the impacts discussed above, operating income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 7% to $717 million (or 19.3% of sales) from $670 million (or 20.3% of sales) for the same period one year ago.    ​Other income and expense:Total other expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 8% to $39 million (or 1.1% of sales) from $36 million (or 1.1% of sales) for the same period one year ago.  The increase in total other expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was 18
the result of increased interest expense on higher average outstanding borrowings, partially offset by an increase in the value of our trading securities, as compared to a decrease in the same period one year ago.    Income taxes:Our provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 6% to $161 million (23.7% effective tax rate) from $151 million (23.9% effective tax rate) for the same period one year ago.  The increase in our provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was the result of higher taxable income, partially offset by higher excess tax benefits from share-based compensation.  The decrease in our effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was the result of higher excess tax benefits from share-based compensation. Net income:As a result of the impacts discussed above, net income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 7% to $517 million (or 13.9% of sales) from $482 million (or 14.6% of sales) for the same period one year ago.    Earnings per share:Our diluted earnings per common share for the three months ended March 31, 2023, increased 15% to $8.28 on 62 million shares from $7.17 on 67 million shares for the same period one year ago.
Our long-term business strategy requires capital to open new stores, fund strategic acquisitions, expand distribution infrastructure, operate and maintain our existing stores, develop enhanced information technology systems and tools, and may include the opportunistic repurchase of shares of our common stock through our Board-approved share repurchase program.  Our material cash requirements necessary to maintain the current operations of our long-term business strategy include, but are not limited to, inventory purchases; human capital obligations, including payroll and benefits; contractual obligations, including debt and interest obligations; capital expenditures; payment of income taxes; and other operational priorities.  We expect to fund our short- and long-term cash and capital requirements with our primary sources of liquidity, which include funds generated from the normal course of our business operations, borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility, and senior note offerings.  However, there can be no assurance that we will continue to generate cash flows or maintain liquidity at or above recent levels, as we are unable to predict decreased demand for our products or changes in customer buying patterns.  Additionally, these factors could also impact our ability to meet the debt covenants of our credit agreement and, therefore, negatively impact the funds available under our unsecured revolving credit facility.Other than the commitment discussed in Note 12 “Commitments” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, there have been no material changes to the contractual obligations, to which we are committed, since those discussed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.The following table identifies cash provided by/(used in) our operating, investing and financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 (in thousands):
(1)Calculated as net cash provided by operating activities, less capital expenditures, excess tax benefit from share-based compensation payments, and investment in tax credit equity investments for the period.  See page 21 for the reconciliation of the calculation of free cash flow.
The increase in net cash provided by operating activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, was primarily due to a smaller decrease in accrued benefits and withholdings, an increase in net income, and a smaller increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by an increase in net inventory investment.  The decrease in accrued benefits and withholdings
was due to lower accrued incentive compensation payments in 2023, versus the same period in 2022.  The smaller increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to the business day timing of period end dates.  ​Investing activities:The increase in net cash used in investing activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, was the result of an increase in capital expenditures.  The increase in capital expenditures was primarily due to an increase in store and distribution enhancement and expansion projects, as well as an increase in vehicle fleet upgrade investments, in the current period, as compared to the same period in the prior year.    ​Financing activities:The decrease in net cash used in financing activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, was attributable to net borrowings on our revolving credit facility in the current period, partially offset by an increase in repurchases of our common stock in the current period, as compared to the same period in the prior year.​Debt instruments:See Note 6 “Financing” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information concerning the Company’s credit agreement, unsecured revolving credit facility, outstanding letters of credit and unsecured senior notes. ​Debt covenants:The indentures governing our senior notes contain covenants that limit our ability and the ability of certain of our subsidiaries to, among other things, create certain liens on assets to secure certain debt and enter into certain sale and leaseback transactions, and limit our ability to merge or consolidate with another company or transfer all or substantially all of our property, in each case as set forth in the indentures.  These covenants are, however, subject to a number of important limitations and exceptions.  As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with the covenants applicable to our senior notes. ​The Credit Agreement contains certain covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, a minimum consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 2.50:1.00 and a maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 3.50:1.00.  The consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio includes a calculation of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, rent, and non-cash share-based compensation expense to fixed charges.  Fixed charges include interest expense, capitalized interest, and rent expense.  The consolidated leverage ratio includes a calculation of adjusted debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, amortization, rent, and non-cash share-based compensation expense.  Adjusted debt includes outstanding debt, outstanding stand-by letters of credit, and similar instruments, five-times rent expense and excludes any premium or discount recorded in conjunction with the issuance of long-term debt.  In the event that we should default on any covenant contained within the Credit Agreement, certain actions may be taken, including, but not limited to, possible termination of commitments, immediate payment of outstanding principal amounts plus accrued interest and other amounts payable under the Credit Agreement, and litigation from our lenders. ​We had a consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio of 6.64 times and 6.93 times as of March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and a consolidated leverage ratio of 1.86 times and 1.62 times as of March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, remaining in compliance with all covenants related to the borrowing arrangements. ​20
The table below outlines the calculations of the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio and consolidated leverage ratio covenants, as defined in the Credit Agreement governing the Revolving Credit Facility, for the twelve months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 (dollars in thousands):
(1)The table below outlines the calculation of Rent expense and reconciles Rent expense to Total lease cost, per Accounting Standard Codification 842 (“ASC 842”) the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for the twelve months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 (in thousands):
The table below outlines the calculation of Free cash flow and reconciles Free cash flow to Net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 (in thousands):
Free cash flow, the consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio, and the consolidated leverage ratio discussed and presented in the tables above are not derived in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”).  We do not, nor do we suggest investors should, consider such non-GAAP financial measures in isolation from, or as a substitute for, GAAP financial information.  We believe that the presentation of our free cash flow, consolidated fixed charge coverage ratio, and consolidated leverage ratio provides meaningful supplemental information to both management and investors and reflects the required covenants under the Credit Agreement.  We include these items in judging our performance and believe this non-GAAP information is useful to investors as
well.  Material limitations of these non-GAAP measures are that such measures do not reflect actual GAAP amounts.  We compensate for such limitations by presenting, in the tables above, a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
See Note 8 “Share Repurchase Program” to the Consolidated Financial Statements for information on our share repurchase program.
The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires the application of certain estimates and judgments by management.  Management bases its assumptions, estimates, and adjustments on historical experience, current trends and other factors believed to be relevant at the time the condensed consolidated financial statements are prepared. There have been no material changes in the critical accounting estimates since those discussed in our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
See Note 15 “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for information about recent accounting pronouncements.