
Portions of this report contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. All statements other than statements of historical fact are “forward-looking statements” for purposes of federal and state securities laws, and they include, but are not limited to: any projections of earnings, revenue or other financial items or future financial position or sources of financing; any statements of the plans, strategies and objectives of management for future operations, business strategy or financial position; any statements regarding future economic conditions or performance; any statements of belief; and any statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing. Words such as “estimate,” “project,” “predict,” “will,” “would,” “should,” “could,” “may,” “might,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “intend,” “believe,” “expect,” “aim,” “goal,” “target,” “objective,” "commit," "advance," “likely” or similar expressions that convey the prospective nature of events or outcomes are generally indicative of forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date of this report. Unless legally required, Occidental does not undertake any obligation to update, modify or withdraw any forward-looking statements as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.Although Occidental believes that the expectations reflected in any of its forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results may differ from anticipated results, sometimes materially. In addition, historical, current and forward-looking sustainability-related statements may be based on standards for measuring progress that are still developing, internal controls and processes that continue to evolve and assumptions that are subject to change in the future. Factors that could cause results to differ from those projected or assumed in any forward-looking statement include, but are not limited to: general economic conditions, including slowdowns and recessions, domestically or internationally; Occidental’s indebtedness and other payment obligations, including the need to generate sufficient cash flows to fund operations; Occidental’s ability to successfully monetize select assets and repay or refinance debt and the impact of changes in Occidental’s credit ratings; the scope and duration of the global or regional health pandemics or epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties in connection therewith; assumptions about energy markets; global and local commodity and commodity-futures pricing fluctuations and volatility; supply and demand considerations for, and the prices of, Occidental’s products and services; actions by OPEC and non-OPEC oil producing countries; results from operations and competitive conditions; future impairments of Occidental's proved and unproved oil and gas properties or equity investments, or write-downs of productive assets, causing charges to earnings; unexpected changes in costs; inflation, its impact on markets and economic activity and related monetary policy actions by governments in response to inflation; availability of capital resources, levels of capital expenditures and contractual obligations; the regulatory approval environment, including Occidental's ability to timely obtain or maintain permits or other governmental approvals, including those necessary for drilling and/or development projects; Occidental's ability to successfully complete, or any material delay of, field developments, expansion projects, capital expenditures, efficiency projects, acquisitions or dispositions; risks associated with acquisitions, mergers and joint ventures, such as difficulties integrating businesses, uncertainty associated with financial projections, projected synergies, restructuring, increased costs and adverse tax consequences; uncertainties and liabilities associated with acquired and divested properties and businesses; uncertainties about the estimated quantities of oil, NGL and natural gas reserves; lower-than-expected production from development projects or acquisitions; Occidental’s ability to realize the anticipated benefits from prior or future streamlining actions to reduce fixed costs, simplify or improve processes and improve Occidental’s competitiveness; exploration, drilling and other operational risks; disruptions to, capacity constraints in, or other limitations on the pipeline systems that deliver Occidental’s oil and natural gas and other processing and transportation considerations; volatility in the securities, capital or credit markets, including capital market disruptions and instability of financial institutions; governmental actions, war (including the Russia-Ukraine war) and political conditions and events; environmental risks and liability under federal, regional, state, provincial, tribal, local and international environmental laws, regulations and litigation (including the potential liability for remedial actions or assessments under existing or future laws, regulations and litigation); legislative or regulatory changes, including changes relating to hydraulic fracturing or other oil and natural gas operations, retroactive royalty or production tax regimes, deep-water and onshore drilling and permitting regulations and environmental regulations (including regulations related to climate change); Occidental's ability to recognize intended benefits from its business strategies and initiatives, such as Occidental's low carbon ventures businesses or announced greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets or net-zero goals; potential liability resulting from pending or future litigation; disruption or interruption of production or manufacturing or facility damage due to accidents, chemical releases, labor unrest, weather, power outages, natural disasters, cyber-attacks, terrorist acts or insurgent activity; the creditworthiness and performance of Occidental's counterparties, including financial institutions, operating partners and other parties; failure of risk management; Occidental’s ability to retain and hire key personnel; supply, transportation, and labor constraints; reorganization or restructuring of Occidental’s operations; changes in state, federal or international tax rates; and actions by third parties that are beyond Occidental's control.Additional information concerning these and other factors that may cause Occidental’s results of operations and financial position to differ from expectations can be found in Occidental’s other filings with the SEC, including Occidental’s 2022 Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K.
Occidental’s operations, financial condition, cash flows and levels of expenditures are highly dependent on oil prices and, to a lesser extent, NGL and natural gas prices, the Midland-to-Gulf-Coast oil spreads, chemical product prices and inflationary pressures in the macro-economic environment. The average WTI price per barrel for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $76.13, compared to $82.65 for the three months ended December 31, 2022. Oil prices decreased in the first quarter of 2023 as inflation and economic concerns signaled a potential decrease in energy demand, despite the ongoing global impact of the Russia-Ukraine war. It is expected that the price of oil will be volatile for the foreseeable future given the current geopolitical risks, evolving macro-economic environment that impacts energy demand, future actions by OPEC and non-OPEC oil producing countries and the Biden Administration's management of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum Reserve.Occidental works to manage inflation impacts by capitalizing on operational efficiencies, locking in pricing on longer-term contracts and working closely with vendors to secure the supply of critical materials. As of March 31, 2023, substantially all of Occidental's outstanding debt is fixed rate.
Occidental’s capital and operational priorities for 2023 are intended to maximize cash flow by sustaining 2022 production levels and maintaining capital discipline. Occidental intends to utilize operating cash flows to:■preserve and enhance its existing asset base with investments in its core cash-generative oil and gas and chemical businesses as well as emerging low-carbon businesses with a focus on its net-zero pathway;■continue its shareholder return framework in the form of a sustainable common share dividend and an active share buyback plan, which could result in partial redemptions of the preferred stock further improving Occidental's financial position; and■continue to opportunistically reduce financial leverage.During the first three months of 2023, Occidental generated cash flow from operations of $2.9 billion and incurred capital expenditures of $1.5 billion.
As of March 31, 2023, Occidental’s long-term debt was rated Baa3 by Moody’s Investors Service, BB+ by Fitch Ratings and BB+ by Standard and Poor’s. Occidental's credit rating was upgraded to investment grade by Moody's Investors Service in March 2023. Any downgrade in credit ratings could impact Occidental's ability to access capital markets and increase its cost of capital. In addition, Occidental or its subsidiaries may be requested, elect to provide or in some cases be required to provide collateral in the form of cash, letters of credit, surety bonds or other acceptable support as financial assurance of their performance and payment obligations under certain contractual arrangements such as pipeline transportation contracts, environmental remediation obligations, oil and gas purchase contracts and certain derivative instruments. Occidental has no remaining debt maturities in 2023.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, Occidental declared dividends to common shareholders of $164 million or $0.18 per share and repurchased 12.5 million common shares at an average price of $60.09 per share. In March 2023, Occidental triggered the mandatory redemption provision. Occidental accrued redemptions of preferred stock with a face value of $647 million, and an additional $65 million premium. To the extent Occidental's trailing 12-month distributions to common shareholders remains above $4.00 per share, Occidental is required to continue to match any common shareholder distributions with preferred stock redemptions. Of the $712 million mandatory redemptions accrued as of March 31, 2023, $551 million, inclusive of the 10% premium, was settled for cash subsequent to March 31, 2023 but before the date of this filing.
Occidental’s operations and cash flows can vary significantly based on changes in oil, NGL and natural gas prices and the prices it receives for its chemical products. Such changes in prices could result in adjustments in capital investment levels and how such capital is allocated, which could impact production volumes. Significant changes have occurred in the macro-economic environment over the previous year, which have impacted energy demand leading to decreases in commodity prices and chemical product pricing, and correspondingly Occidental's results of operations and cash flows. Occidental's results of operations and cash flows are driven by these macro-economic effects rather than seasonality.The following table sets forth earnings of each operating segment and corporate items:
(a)    Refer to the Items Affecting Comparability table which sets forth items affecting Occidental's earnings that vary widely and unpredictably in nature, timing and amount.
The following table sets forth items affecting the comparability of Occidental's earnings that vary widely and unpredictably in nature, timing and amount:
(a)    Included in Income from equity investments and other in the Consolidated Condensed Statement of Operations.Excluding items affecting comparability, the decrease in net income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended December 31, 2022, was primarily due to lower crude oil and domestic natural gas commodity prices, and lower international sales volumes in the oil and gas segment. Excluding items affecting comparability, the decrease in net income for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, was primarily due to lower crude oil and domestic NGL and natural gas commodity prices in the oil and gas segment, and lower realized PVC prices and lower demand across most product lines in the chemical segment, partially offset by higher worldwide oil and gas sales volumes.
Net sales decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended December 31, 2022, primarily due to lower crude oil and domestic natural gas commodity prices and lower international sales volumes in the oil and gas segment.Purchased commodities decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended December 31, 2022, due to lower prices on third-party crude purchases related to the midstream and marketing segment.Net sales decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to lower crude oil and domestic NGL and natural gas commodity prices in the oil and gas segment, as well as lower realized PVC prices and sales volumes across most products in the chemical segment.Oil and gas operating expense increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily as a result of higher workover and maintenance costs due to increased domestic activities.Purchased commodities decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022,  due to lower prices on third-party crude purchases related to the midstream and marketing segment.The income tax expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to a benefit for the same period in 2022, resulted primarily from the tax benefit associated with Occidental's legal entity reorganization. See Income Taxes section for further discussion.
Occidental’s principal businesses consist of three reporting segments: oil and gas, chemical and midstream and marketing. The oil and gas segment explores for, develops and produces oil and condensate, NGL and natural gas. The chemical segment mainly manufactures and markets basic chemicals and vinyls. The midstream and marketing segment purchases, markets, gathers, processes, transports and stores oil (which includes condensate), NGL, natural gas, CO2 and power. It also optimizes its transportation and storage capacity and invests in entities that conduct similar activities such as WES. The midstream and marketing segment also includes Occidental's low carbon ventures businesses. Occidental's low carbon ventures businesses seek to leverage Occidental’s legacy of carbon management expertise to develop carbon capture, utilization and storage projects, including the commercialization of direct air capture technology, invest in other low-carbon technologies intended to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from its operations and strategically partner with other industries to help reduce their emissions.
The following table sets forth the average sales volumes per day for oil and NGL in Mbbl and for natural gas in MMcf:
(a)    Natural gas volumes have been converted to Boe based on energy content of six Mcf of gas to one barrel of oil. Barrels of oil equivalent does not necessarily result in price equivalency.The following table presents information about Occidental's average realized prices and index prices:
Oil and gas segment income was $1.6 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with segment income of $2.5 billion for the three months ended December 31, 2022. Excluding the impact of items affecting comparability, oil and gas segment results for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended December 31, 2022, reflected lower crude oil and domestic natural gas commodity prices, as well as lower international sales volumes.The decrease in average daily sales volumes of 16 Mboe/d for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended December 31, 2022, primarily reflected planned activities at Al Hosn Gas in preparation to complete the expansion project and the impact of the new Algeria PSC contracts, partially offset by increased activity in Permian Resources and better well performance and higher operating rates in the Gulf of Mexico. Oil and gas segment income was $1.6 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with segment income of $2.9 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Excluding the impact of items affecting comparability, oil and gas segment results for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, reflected lower crude oil, domestic natural gas and domestic NGL commodity prices, partially offset by higher worldwide sales volumes.The increase in average daily sales volumes of 140 Mboe/d for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily reflected increased activity in the Permian Basin and Gulf of Mexico and the prior year planned shutdown at Al Hosn Gas to allow for tie-in work for the expansion project. The following table presents an analysis of the impacts of changes in average realized prices and sales volumes with regard to Occidental's domestic and international oil and gas revenue:
(a)     Includes the impact of international production sharing contracts.(b)    Excludes "other" oil and gas revenue. See Note 2 - Revenue in the notes to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for additional information regarding other revenue.
Chemical segment earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $472 million, compared to $457 million for the three months ended December 31, 2022. The increase was driven primarily by lower ethylene and energy costs, partially offset by lower realized caustic soda and PVC pricing.Chemical segment earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $472 million, compared to $671 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease was driven primarily by lower realized PVC pricing as well as lower sales volumes due to decreased demand across most product lines.
Midstream and marketing segment earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $2 million, compared with losses of $45 million for the three months ended December 31, 2022. Excluding the impact of items affecting comparability, the increase in midstream and marketing pre-tax first quarter results reflected the timing impact of crude oil sales and favorable gas margins due to transportation capacity optimization in the marketing business, partially offset by lower equity method investment income from WES.Midstream and marketing segment earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $2 million, compared with losses of $50 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Excluding the impact of items affecting comparability, the decrease in midstream and marketing segment results was primarily driven by increased activities in the low carbon ventures businesses, lower NGL prices impacting domestic gas plants and lower sulfur prices at Al Hosn Gas, partially offset by higher volumes from Al Hosn Gas and favorable gas margins from the optimization of gas transportation capacities in the marketing business.
The following table sets forth the calculation of the worldwide effective tax rate for income:
Occidental estimates its annual effective income tax rate in recording its quarterly provision for income taxes in the various jurisdictions in which Occidental operates, adjusted for certain discrete items. Each quarter, Occidental updates these rates and records a cumulative adjustment to its income taxes by applying the rates to the pre-tax income excluding certain discrete items. Occidental’s quarterly estimate of its effective tax rates can vary significantly based on various forecasted items, including future commodity prices, capital expenditures, expenses for which tax benefits are not recognized and the geographic mix of pre-tax income and losses. The 27% worldwide effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was primarily driven by Occidental's jurisdictional mix of income. U.S. income is taxed at a U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%, while international income is subject to tax at statutory rates as high as 55%. The (58)% effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2022 and the 20% for the three months ended December 31, 2022, were primarily driven by the jurisdictional mix of income as well as tax benefits associated with Occidental’s legal entity reorganization in 2022, which is currently under IRS review as part of Occidental's 2022 federal tax audit.
As of March 31, 2023, Occidental had approximately $1.2 billion of cash and cash equivalents on hand. Through the date of this filing, Occidental has drawn no amounts under its RCF, which has $4.0 billion of borrowing capacity and matures in June 2025. Additionally, Occidental has up to $600 million of available borrowing capacity on its receivables securitization facility which matures in December 2024. Through the date of this filing, there were no amounts outstanding on Occidental's receivable securitization facility as of March 31, 2023.Operating cash flow was $2.9 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $3.2 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease in operating cash flow from continuing operations was primarily due to lower commodity prices as compared to the same period in 2022.Occidental’s net cash used by investing activities was $1.6 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $662 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Capital expenditures, of which the majority were for the oil and gas segment, were approximately $1.5 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $858 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Occidental's remaining capital budget is expected to be funded through cash flows generated from operations. Occidental’s net cash used by financing activities was $1.1 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $3.4 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Cash used by financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 reflected treasury share repurchases of $732 million and dividend payments of $320 million on preferred and common stock. Cash used by financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 reflected repayments of debt of $3.3 billion and dividend payments of $216 million on preferred and common stock. Occidental intends to fund the preferred stock redemptions and both the common and preferred dividends accrued as of March 31, 2023 through operating cash flows. As of March 31, 2023, Occidental had $2.2 billion remaining of the $3.0 billion share repurchase program that was announced in February 2023. The program does not obligate Occidental to acquire any specific number of shares and may be discontinued at any time.Occidental’s Zero Coupons can be put to Occidental in October of each year, in whole or in part, for the then accreted value of the outstanding Zero Coupons. The Zero Coupons can next be put to Occidental in October 2023, which, if put in whole, would require a payment of approximately $344 million at such date. Occidental currently has the ability to meet this obligation and may use available capacity under the RCF to satisfy the put should it be exercised.As of March 31, 2023, and through the date of this filing, Occidental was in compliance with all covenants in its financing agreements. Occidental has no remaining debt maturities in 2023, $1.1 billion in 2024, $1.2 billion in 2025, $1.4 billion in 2026 and $14.2 billion thereafter. Occidental currently expects its cash on hand, cash flow from operations, and funds available from the RCF and/or receivables securitization facility to be sufficient to meet its near-term debt maturities, operating expenditures and other obligations for the next 12 months from the date of this filing. Occidental or its subsidiaries have provided financial assurances through a combination of cash, letters of credit and surety bonds. As of March 31, 2023, Occidental had not issued any letters of credit under the RCF or other committed facilities. For additional information, see Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A of Occidental’s 2022 Form 10-K.
Occidental’s operations are subject to stringent federal, regional, state, provincial, tribal, local and international laws and regulations related to improving or maintaining environmental quality. Occidental’s environmental compliance costs have generally increased over time and are expected to rise in the future. Occidental factors environmental expenditures for its operations as an integral part of its business planning process.The laws that require or address environmental remediation, including CERCLA and similar federal, regional, state, provincial, tribal, local and international laws, may apply retroactively and regardless of fault, the legality of the original activities or the current ownership or control of sites. Occidental or certain of its subsidiaries participate in or actively monitor a range of remedial activities and government or private proceedings under these laws with respect to alleged past practices at Third-Party, Currently Operated, and Closed or Non-Operated Sites. Remedial activities may include one or more of the following: investigation involving sampling, modeling, risk assessment or monitoring; cleanup measures including removal, treatment or disposal; or operation and maintenance of remedial systems. The environmental proceedings seek funding or performance of remediation and, in some cases, compensation for alleged property damage, natural resource damages, punitive damages, civil penalties, injunctive relief and government oversight costs.
Occidental accrues reserves for outstanding lawsuits, claims and proceedings when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the liability can be reasonably estimated. Occidental has disclosed its reserve balances for environmental remediation matters and its estimated range of reasonably possible additional losses for such matters. See Note 7 - Environmental Liabilities and Expenditures and Note 8 - Lawsuits, Claims, Commitments and Contingencies in the notes to the Consolidated Condensed Financial Statements in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for further information.