
Management’s discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of Paramount Global should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. References in this document to “Paramount,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Paramount Global. Significant components of management’s discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition include:•Overview—Summary of our business and operational highlights.•Consolidated Results of Operations—Analysis of our results on a consolidated basis for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022.•Segment Results of Operations—Analysis of our results on a reportable segment basis for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022.•Liquidity and Capital Resources—Discussion of our cash flows, including sources and uses of cash, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022; and of our outstanding debt as of March 31, 2023.•Legal Matters—Discussion of legal matters to which we are involved.
n/m - not meaningful(a)   Certain items identified as affecting comparability are excluded in non-GAAP results. See “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures” for details of these items and reconciliations of non-GAAP results to the most directly comparable financial measures in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”).For the three months ended March 31, 2023, revenues decreased 1% to $7.27 billion, as lower revenues from our linear networks and the licensing of our content were substantially offset by growth in revenues from our streaming services, led by Paramount+. The decline for our linear networks principally reflects weakness in the global advertising market. We reported an operating loss of $1.23 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared with operating income of $775 million for the comparable prior-year period. The comparison was impacted by programming charges of $1.67 billion recorded during the first quarter of 2023. Adjusted operating income before depreciation and amortization (“Adjusted OIBDA”), which excludes these charges, as well as other items described under Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures, decreased 40%, driven by the decline in revenue and higher costs principally associated with investment in our streaming services.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we reported a net loss from continuing operations attributable to Paramount of $1.16 billion, or $1.81 per diluted share, compared with net earnings from continuing operations attributable to Paramount of $391 million, or $.58 per diluted share, for the same prior-year period. The comparison was impacted by the programming charges noted above and the other items described under Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures for the applicable period. Adjusted net earnings from continuing operations attributable to Paramount and adjusted diluted EPS, which exclude these items, decreased 82% and 85%, respectively, primarily reflecting the lower Adjusted OIBDA.
Results for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 included certain items identified as affecting comparability. Adjusted OIBDA, adjusted earnings from continuing operations before income taxes, adjusted provision for income taxes, adjusted net earnings from continuing operations attributable to Paramount, and adjusted diluted EPS from continuing operations (together, the “adjusted measures”) exclude the impact of these items and are measures of performance not calculated in accordance with GAAP. We use these measures to, among other things, evaluate our operating performance. These measures are among the primary measures used by management for planning and forecasting of future periods, and they are important indicators of our operational strength and business performance. In addition, we use Adjusted OIBDA to, among other things, value prospective acquisitions. We believe these measures are relevant and useful for investors because they allow investors to view performance in a manner similar to the method used by our management; provide a clearer perspective on our underlying performance; and make it easier for investors, analysts and peers to compare our operating performance to other companies in our industry and to compare our year-over-year results. Because the adjusted measures are measures of performance not calculated in accordance with GAAP, they should not be considered in isolation of, or as a substitute for, operating income (loss), earnings (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes, (provision) benefit for income taxes, net earnings (loss) from continuing operations attributable to Paramount or diluted EPS from continuing operations, as applicable, as indicators of operating performance. These measures, as we calculate them, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies. The following tables reconcile the adjusted measures to their most directly comparable financial measures in accordance with GAAP.
(a) See notes on the following tables for additional information on items affecting comparability.
(a) In connection with our plan to integrate Showtime into Paramount+ and initiatives to rationalize and right-size our international operations to align with our streaming strategy and close or globalize certain of our international channels, during the first quarter of 2023 we reviewed our content portfolio and determined that we would not use certain content on our platforms. Accordingly, we recorded programming charges, which were comprised of impairment charges for content removed from our platforms or abandoned, development cost write-offs and contract termination costs.(b)  Principally reflects a tax benefit from the resolution of an income tax matter in a foreign jurisdiction.
(a) Comprised of restructuring charges of $18 million for severance costs, and a charge of $39 million recorded following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, principally to reserve against amounts due from counterparties in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine.(b) Reflects a gain from the sale of international intangible assets and a working capital adjustment to the gain from the fourth quarter 2021 sale of CBS Studio Center.(c) Primarily reflects a deferred tax benefit resulting from the transfer of intangible assets between our subsidiaries in connection with a reorganization of our international operations.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the 7% decrease in advertising revenues was driven by weakness in the global advertising market as well as the airing of fewer National Football League (“NFL”) games on CBS in the first quarter of 2023 compared with the same prior-year period.
Affiliate and subscription revenues are principally comprised of fees received from multichannel video programming distributors (MVPDs) and third-party live television streaming services (virtual MVPDs or vMVPDs) for carriage of our cable networks (cable affiliate fees) and our owned television stations (retransmission fees), fees received from television stations for their affiliation with the CBS Television Network (“reverse compensation”), and subscription fees for our streaming services. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, affiliate and subscription revenues increased 12%, driven by growth in subscribers for Paramount+ to 60.0 million at March 31, 2023 from 39.6 million at March 31, 2022. The increase in subscription revenue was partially offset by lower international affiliate fees for our linear networks, including an unfavorable impact from foreign exchange rate changes. Foreign exchange rate changes unfavorably impacted the total affiliate and subscription revenue comparison by 1 percentage point.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, theatrical revenues decreased $4 million, reflecting the timing and mix of releases. Releases during the period included Scream VI, 80 for Brady, and Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves while releases in the comparable prior-year period were Scream (2022), Jackass Forever, and The Lost City.
Licensing and other revenues are principally comprised of fees from the licensing of the rights to exhibit our internally-produced television and film programming on various platforms in the secondary market after its initial exhibition on our owned or third-party platforms; license fees from content produced or distributed for third parties; home entertainment revenues, which include the viewing of our content on a transactional basis through transactional video-on-demand (TVOD) and electronic sell-through services and the sale and distribution of our content through DVDs and Blu-ray discs to wholesale and retail partners; fees from the use of our trademarks and brands for consumer products, recreation and live events; and revenues from the rental of production facilities.
The 12% decrease in licensing and other revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 reflects a lower volume of licensing in the secondary market.
Content costs include the amortization of costs of internally-produced television and theatrical film content; amortization of acquired program rights; other television production costs, including on-air talent; and participation and residuals expenses, which reflect amounts owed to talent and other participants in our content pursuant to contractual and collective bargaining arrangements. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, content costs increased 2% as a result of our investment in content for our streaming services, which was partially offset by lower costs associated with the decrease in licensing revenue and lower sports programming costs.
Distribution and other operating expenses primarily include costs relating to the distribution of our content, including print and advertising for theatrical releases and costs for third-party distribution; compensation; revenue-sharing costs to television stations affiliated with the CBS Television Network; and other ancillary and overhead costs associated with our operations. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, distribution and other expenses increased 11% primarily reflecting higher costs associated with the growth of our streaming services, including costs for third-party distribution, revenue sharing, technology and compensation. The increase also reflects higher costs to support theatrical releases.
During the first quarter of 2023, in connection with our plan to integrate Showtime into Paramount+ across both streaming and linear platforms, we performed a comprehensive strategic review of the combined content portfolio of Showtime and Paramount+. We also reviewed our international content portfolio in connection with initiatives to rationalize and right-size our international operations to align with our streaming strategy, and close or globalize certain of our international channels. Following these reviews, we determined that we would not use certain content on our platforms, which resulted in the removal or abandonment of content, the write-off of development costs, and the termination of programming agreements during the quarter. Accordingly, we recorded charges totaling $1.67 billion on the Consolidated Statement of Operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023. The charges are comprised of $1.45 billion for the impairment of content to its estimated fair value, which included assumptions for estimated secondary market licensing revenues, if any, as well as $225 million for development
cost write-offs and contract termination costs. As we prepare for the launch of Paramount+ with Showtime later this year, we will continue to evaluate our content portfolio, and may incur additional programming charges.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Increase/(Decrease)Selling, general and administrative    expenses$1,753 $1,619 8 %Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses include costs incurred for advertising, marketing, occupancy, professional service fees, and back office support, including employee compensation and technology. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, SG&A expenses increased 8% driven by advertising, employee costs and other cost increases to support the growth and expansion of our streaming services.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Increase/(Decrease)Depreciation and amortization$100 $96 4 %
During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we recorded restructuring charges of $18 million for severance costs primarily associated with management changes following our operating segment realignment, and a charge of $39 million following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, principally to reserve against amounts due from counterparties in Russia, Belarus and Ukraine.
For the three months ended March 31, 2022, gain on dispositions of $15 million was comprised of a gainfrom the sale of international intangible assets and a working capital adjustment to the gain from the fourth quarter2021 sale of CBS Studio Center.
The following table presents our outstanding debt balances, excluding finance leases, and the weighted average interest rates as of March 31, 2023 and 2022.
For the three months ended March 31, 2022, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $73 million associated with the early redemption of long-term debt of $1.94 billion.
The following table presents the components of Other items, net.
The provision (benefit) for income taxes represents federal, state and local, and foreign taxes on earnings (loss) from continuing operations before income taxes and equity in loss of investee companies. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we recorded a benefit for income taxes of $381 million, reflecting an effective income tax rate of 26.0%. The income tax benefit in the first quarter of 2023 is the result of a tax benefit of $409 million on programming charges of $1.67 billion recorded during the period and a net discrete tax benefit of $30 million, principally from the resolution of an income tax matter in a foreign jurisdiction. Together these items reduced our effective income tax rate by 1.5 percentage points.For the three months ended March 31, 2022, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $34 million, reflecting an effective income tax rate of 7.2%. Included in the provision for income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2022 is a net discrete tax benefit of $78 million primarily resulting from the transfer of intangible assets between our subsidiaries in connection with a reorganization of our international operations. This item, together with a net tax benefit of $25 million on other items identified as affecting the comparability of our results during the period (which include a loss on extinguishment of debt, restructuring and other corporate matters, and a gain on dispositions) reduced our effective income tax rate by 16.2 percentage points.
The following table presents equity in loss of investee companies for our equity-method investments.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the higher loss for our equity-method investments was driven by our investment in SkyShowtime.
n/m-not meaningfulFor the three months ended March 31, 2023, we reported a net loss from continuing operations attributable to Paramount of $1.16 billion, or $1.81 per diluted share compared with net earnings from continuing operations attributable to Paramount of $391 million, or $.58 per diluted share. The decrease was driven by the decline in operating income, including the impact from the programming charges discussed above.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we entered into an agreement to sell our publishing business, Simon & Schuster, which was previously reported as the Publishing segment and as a result, we began presenting Simon & Schuster as a discontinued operation. In the fourth quarter of 2022, we terminated the agreement after the U.S. Department of Justice prevailed in its suit to block the sale. Simon & Schuster remains a noncore asset as it does not fit strategically within our video-based portfolio. We expect to enter into a new agreement to sell Simon & Schuster in 2023. Assuming that we do so, closing would be subject to closing conditions that would include regulatory approval. Simon & Schuster continues to be presented as a discontinued operation for all periods presented.
The following table sets forth details of net earnings from discontinued operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, which primarily reflects the results of Simon & Schuster.
(a)  Included in total costs and expenses are amounts associated with the release of indemnification obligations for leases relating to a previously disposed business of $4 million and $5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(b) The tax provision includes amounts relating to previously disposed businesses of $1 million for each of the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
We present operating income excluding depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, costs for restructuring and other corporate matters, programming charges and gain on dispositions, each where applicable (“Adjusted OIBDA”), as the primary measure of profit and loss for our operating segments in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board guidance for segment reporting since it is the primary method used by our management. Stock-based compensation is excluded from our segment measure of profit and loss because it is set and approved by our Board of Directors in consultation with corporate executive management. Stock-based compensation is included as a component of our consolidated Adjusted OIBDA. See Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Measures for a reconciliation of total Adjusted OIBDA to Operating Income (Loss), the most directly comparable financial measure in accordance with GAAP.
n/m - not meaningful(a) For the three months ended March 31, 2022, stock-based compensation expense of $2 million is included in “Restructuring and other corporate matters”.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, revenues decreased 8%, primarily reflecting lower advertising and licensing revenues.
The 11% decrease in advertising revenues was primarily the result of lower impressions for our domestic networks, which were only partially offset by higher pricing, and lower revenues for our international networks, as our advertising revenues were impacted globally by weakness in the advertising market. The decline in advertising revenues also reflects the airing of fewer NFL games on CBS in the first quarter of 2023 compared with the same prior-year period, and an adverse effect from foreign exchange rate changes of 2 percentage points.
The 1% decrease in affiliate and subscription revenues mainly reflects lower international affiliate revenues, driven by unfavorable foreign exchange rate changes and a shift of revenue from our pay television services to our streaming services following the restructuring of certain affiliate agreements. Domestic affiliate revenues were
essentially flat compared with the prior-year period as the impact from lower domestic subscribers was substantially offset by growth in reverse compensation and contractual rate increases.
Licensing and other revenues decreased 15%, reflecting a lower volume of licensing in the secondary market and  lower revenues from content produced for third parties.
Adjusted OIBDA decreased 15%, primarily driven by the decline in revenues, partially offset by lower content costs associated with the decrease in content licensing revenues and lower sports programming costs.
(a) Subscribers include customers with access to Paramount+, either directly through our owned and operated apps and websites, or through third-party distributors. Our subscribers include paid subscriptions and those customers registered in a free trial. For the periods above, subscriber counts reflect the number of subscribers as of the applicable period-end date.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the 39% increase in revenue was primarily driven by growth from Paramount+.
The 15% increase in advertising revenues was driven by an increase in impressions, reflecting the benefit from growth in Paramount+ subscribers.
The 50% increase in subscription revenues reflects growth across our streaming services, primarily from Paramount+. Paramount+ subscribers grew 20.4 million, or 52%, compared to March 31, 2022, driven by the benefit from 2022 launches in international markets as well as growth in U.S. subscribers. Subscriber growth was impacted by the removal of 1.9 million Paramount+ subscribers following the September 2022 launch of the SkyShowtime streaming service in the Nordics, where it replaced Paramount+ in the market, and the removal in
April 2022 of 1.2 million Paramount+ subscribers in Russia, where we suspended our operations following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.During the quarter, global Paramount+ subscribers increased 4.1 million, or 7%, to 60.0 million, compared with 55.9 million at December 31, 2022, reflecting the continued success of our content, including 1923, Tulsa King, Top Gun: Maverick and Teen Wolf: The Movie as well as the NFL Playoffs.
Adjusted OIBDA decreased $55 million, as revenue growth was more than offset by higher costs to support growth in our streaming services including content, advertising, distribution, employee and technology costs.
(a) Primarily reflects advertising revenues earned from the use of Filmed Entertainment content on third party digital platforms.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023, revenues decreased 6%, driven by lower licensing revenues.
The $4 million decrease in theatrical revenues reflects the timing and mix of releases. Releases during the first quarter of 2023 included Scream VI, 80 for Brady, and Dungeons & Dragons: Honor Among Thieves while releases in the comparable prior-year period were Scream (2022), Jackass Forever, and The Lost City.
The 7% decrease in licensing and other revenues primarily reflects lower consumer products licensing revenues as a result of macroeconomic softness.
Adjusted OIBDA decreased $62 million in the quarter, driven by an adverse impact from the timing of the release of Dungeons and Dragons: Honor Among Thieves on the last day of the quarter, costs from the release of Miramax’s Operation Fortune: Ruse de Guerre, and the decline in consumer products licensing revenues.Fluctuations in results for the Filmed Entertainment segment may occur as a result of the timing of the recognition of distribution costs, including print and advertising, which are generally incurred before and throughout the
theatrical release of a film, while the revenues for the respective film are recognized as earned through the film’s theatrical exhibition and distribution to other platforms.
We project anticipated cash requirements for our operating, investing and financing needs as well as cash flows expected to be generated and available to meet these needs. Our operating needs include, among other items, expenditures for content for our broadcast and cable networks and streaming services, including television and film programming, sports rights, and talent contracts, as well as advertising and marketing costs to promote our content and platforms; payments for leases, interest, and income taxes; and pension funding obligations. Our planned spending throughout 2023 includes continued increased investment in our streaming services. Our investing and financing spending includes capital expenditures; acquisitions; funding relating to new and existing investments, including SkyShowtime, our streaming joint venture with Comcast, under which both parent companies have committed to support initial operations over a multiyear period; discretionary share repurchases, dividends and principal payments on our outstanding indebtedness. The Company’s Board of Directors has determined to reduce the quarterly cash dividend on our Class A and Class B Common Stock to $.05 per share (or $.20 annually). We believe that our operating cash flows, cash and cash equivalents, which were $2.11 billion as of March 31, 2023, borrowing capacity under our $3.50 billion Credit Facility described below, as well as access to capital markets are sufficient to fund our operating, investing and financing requirements for the next twelve months.Our funding for long-term obligations, including our long-term debt obligations due over the next five years, which were $2.85 billion as of March 31, 2023, as well as our other long term commitments, will come primarily from cash flows from operating activities, proceeds from noncore asset sales, including the planned sale of Simon & Schuster, and our ability to refinance our debt. Any additional cash funding requirements are financed with short-term borrowings, including commercial paper, and long-term debt. To the extent that commercial paper is not available to us, the Credit Facility provides sufficient capacity to satisfy short-term borrowing needs. In addition, if necessary, we could increase our liquidity position by reducing non-committed spending. We routinely assess our capital structure and opportunistically enter into transactions to manage our outstanding debt maturities, which could result in a charge from the early extinguishment of debt.Our access to capital markets can be impacted by factors outside our control, including economic conditions; however, we believe that our strong balance sheet, cash flows, credit facility and credit ratings will provide us with adequate access to funding for our expected cash needs. The cost of any new borrowings is affected by market conditions and short- and long-term debt ratings assigned by independent rating agencies, and there can be no assurance that we will be able to access capital markets on terms and conditions that will be favorable to us.
The changes in cash and cash equivalents were as follows:
Operating cash flow from continuing operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was a net use of cash of $483 million compared to a net source of cash of $295 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The use of cash in 2023 as well as the decrease in operating cash flow from continuing operations compared to the prior-year period primarily reflects our increased investment in content. Cash flow provided by operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 included payments for restructuring, merger-related costs and transformation initiatives of $65 million and $53 million, respectively. Since the merger of Viacom Inc. (“Viacom”) with and into CBS Corporation (“CBS”) (the “Merger”), we have invested in a number of transformation initiatives. Initially, these were undertaken to realize synergies related to the Merger. More recently, our transformation initiatives are related to future-state technology, including the unification and evolution of systems and platforms, and migration to the cloud. In addition, we are investing in future-state workspaces, including adapting our facilities to accommodate our hybrid and agile work model.   Cash flow provided by operating activities from discontinued operations reflects the operating activities of Simon & Schuster.
(a) Includes payments associated with the implementation of our transformation initiatives of $4 million and $8 million in 2023 and 2022, respectively. (b) 2023 primarily reflects the collection of receivables associated with the sale of a 37.5% interest in The CW in the prior year and proceeds received from the disposition of certain channels in Latin America. 2022 reflects the disposition of international intangible assets.
We declared a quarterly cash dividend of $.24 per share on our Class A and Class B Common Stock during each of the three-month periods ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, resulting in total dividends of $161 million and $159 million, respectively.We declared a quarterly cash dividend of $1.4375 per share on our 5.75% Series A Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock during each of the three-month periods ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, resulting in total dividends of $14.4 million for each of the respective periods.
The following table sets forth our debt.
(a) At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the senior and junior subordinated debt balances included (i) a net unamortized discount of $437 million and $442 million, respectively, and (ii) unamortized deferred financing costs of $88 million and $89 million, respectively. The face value of our total debt was $16.38 billion at both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. During the first quarter of 2022, we redeemed $1.42 billion of senior notes, prior to maturity, for an aggregate redemption price of $1.48 billion and $520 million of 5.875% junior subordinated debentures due February 2057 at par. These redemptions resulted in a total pre-tax loss on extinguishment of debt of $73 million.
During the first quarter of 2022, we also issued $1.00 billion of 6.375% junior subordinated debentures due 2062. The interest rate on these debentures will reset on March 30, 2027, and every five years thereafter to a fixed rate equal to the 5-year Treasury Rate (as defined pursuant to the terms of the debentures) plus a spread. These debentures can be called by us at par plus a make whole premium any time before March 30, 2027, or at par on March 30, 2027, or at any interest payment date thereafter. Our 6.25% junior subordinated debentures due February 2057 accrue interest at the stated fixed rate until February 28, 2027, on which date the rate will switch to a floating rate. These debentures can be called by us at par at any time after the expiration of the fixed-rate period. The subordination, interest deferral option and extended term of our junior subordinated debentures provide significant credit protection measures for senior creditors and, as a result of these features, the debentures received a 50% equity credit by Standard & Poor’s Rating Services and Fitch Ratings Inc., and a 25% equity credit by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc.
At both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we had no outstanding commercial paper borrowings.
In March 2023, we amended and extended our $3.50 billion revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”), which now matures in January 2027 (the “2023 Amendment”). The Credit Facility is used for general corporate purposes and to support commercial paper borrowings, if any. We may, at our option, also borrow in certain foreign currencies up to specified limits under the Credit Facility. Borrowing rates under the Credit Facility are determined at the time of each borrowing and are generally based on either the prime rate in the U.S. or an applicable benchmark rate plus a margin (based on our senior unsecured debt rating), depending on the type and tenor of the loans entered into. Under the 2023 Amendment, we replaced LIBOR as the benchmark rate for loans denominated in U.S. dollars with Term SOFR. The benchmark rate for loans denominated in euros, sterling and yen is based on EURIBOR, SONIA and TIBOR, respectively. The Credit Facility was also amended to include a provision that the occurrence of a Change of Control (as defined in the amended credit agreement) of Paramount will be an event of default that would give the lenders the right to accelerate any outstanding loans and terminate their commitments. At March 31, 2023, we had no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility and the remaining availability under the Credit Facility, net of outstanding letters of credit, was $3.50 billion.The Credit Facility has one principal financial covenant which sets a maximum Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio (“Leverage Ratio”) at the end of each quarter, which prior to the 2023 Amendment was 4.5x. Under the 2023 Amendment, the maximum Leverage Ratio was increased to 5.75x for each quarter through and including the quarter ending September 30, 2024, and will then decrease to 5.5x for the quarters ending December 31, 2024 and March 31, 2025, with decreases of 0.25x for each subsequent quarter until it reaches 4.5x for the quarter ending March 31, 2026. The Leverage Ratio reflects the ratio of our Consolidated Indebtedness, net of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents at the end of a quarter, to our Consolidated EBITDA (each as defined in the amended credit agreement) for the trailing twelve-month period. Under the 2023 Amendment, the definition of the Leverage Ratio was also modified to set the maximum amount of unrestricted cash and cash equivalents that can be netted against Consolidated Indebtedness to $1.50 billion for quarters ending on or after September 30, 2024. In addition, under the 2023 Amendment, Simon & Schuster shall be treated as a continuing operation for the purposes of calculating Consolidated EBITDA until its disposition. We met the covenant as of March 31, 2023.
At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, we had bank borrowings under Miramax’s $300 million credit facility, which matured in April 2023, of $58 million and $55 million, respectively, with weighted average interest rates of 7.48% and 7.09%, respectively.
At March 31, 2023, we had outstanding letters of credit and surety bonds of $178 million that were not recorded on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Letters of credit and surety bonds are primarily used as security against non-performance in the normal course of business.
In connection with the sale of the CBS Television City property and sound stage operation (“CBS Television City”) in 2019, we guaranteed a specified level of cash flows to be generated by the business during the first five years following the completion of the sale. Included in “Other current liabilities” on the Consolidated Balance Sheet at March 31, 2023 is a liability totaling $25 million, reflecting the present value of the remaining estimated amount payable under the guarantee obligation.
We have certain indemnification obligations with respect to leases primarily associated with the previously discontinued operations of Famous Players Inc. These lease commitments totaled $17 million at March 31, 2023, and are presented within “Other liabilities” on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The amount of lease commitments varies over time depending on the expiration or termination of individual underlying leases, or the related indemnification obligation, and foreign exchange rates, among other things. We may also have exposure for certain other expenses related to the leases, such as property taxes and common area maintenance. We believe our accrual is sufficient to meet any future obligations based on our consideration of available financial information, the lessees’ historical performance in meeting their lease obligations and the underlying economic factors impacting the lessees’ business models.
In the course of our business, we both provide and receive indemnities which are intended to allocate certain risks associated with business transactions. Similarly, we may remain contingently liable for various obligations of a business that has been divested in the event that a third party does not live up to its obligations under an indemnification obligation. We record a liability for our indemnification obligations and other contingent liabilities when probable and reasonably estimable.
On an ongoing basis, we vigorously defend ourselves in numerous lawsuits and proceedings and respond to various investigations and inquiries from federal, state, local and international authorities (collectively, “Litigation”). Litigation may be brought against us without merit, is inherently uncertain and always difficult to predict. However, based on our understanding and evaluation of the relevant facts and circumstances, we believe
that the following matters are not likely, in the aggregate, to result in a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Beginning in February 2020, three purported CBS stockholders filed separate derivative and/or putative class action lawsuits in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware (the “Delaware Chancery Court”). In March 2020, the Delaware Chancery Court consolidated the three lawsuits and appointed Bucks County Employees Retirement Fund and International Union of Operating Engineers of Eastern Pennsylvania and Delaware as co-lead plaintiffs for the consolidated action captioned In re CBS Corporation Stockholder Class Action and Derivative Litigation (the “CBS Litigation”). In April 2020, the lead plaintiffs filed a Verified Consolidated Class Action and Derivative Complaint (as used in this paragraph, the “Complaint”) against Shari E. Redstone, National Amusements, Inc., Sumner M. Redstone National Amusements Trust, additional members of the CBS Board of Directors (including Candace K. Beinecke, Barbara M. Byrne, Gary L. Countryman, Linda M. Griego, Robert N. Klieger, Martha L. Minow, Susan Schuman, Frederick O. Terrell and Strauss Zelnick), former CBS President and Acting Chief Executive Officer Joseph Ianniello and the Company as nominal defendant. The Complaint alleges breaches of fiduciary duties in connection with the negotiation and approval of an Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated as of August 13, 2019, between CBS and Viacom (as amended, the “Merger Agreement”). The Complaint also alleges waste and unjust enrichment in connection with certain aspects of Mr. Ianniello’s compensation awards. The Complaint seeks unspecified damages, costs and expenses, as well as other relief. In June 2020, the defendants filed motions to dismiss the Complaint. In January 2021, the Delaware Chancery Court dismissed one disclosure claim, while allowing all other claims against the defendants to proceed. On January 7, 2022, the Delaware Chancery Court granted Bucks County Employees Retirement Fund’s motion to withdraw as a co-lead plaintiff in the CBS Litigation. In December 2022, the Delaware Chancery Court dismissed the fiduciary duty claim against Mr. Klieger. In April 2023, the parties to the CBS Litigation agreed to settle the CBS Litigation on the terms and conditions set forth in a binding term sheet (the “CBS Term Sheet”), which will be incorporated into a long-form settlement agreement that will be subject to the final approval of the Delaware Chancery Court. The CBS Term Sheet provides for, among other things, the final dismissal of the CBS Litigation in exchange for a settlement payment to the Company in the amount of $167.5 million, less administrative costs and plaintiffs’ counsels’ fees and expenses. Beginning in November 2019, four purported Viacom stockholders filed separate putative class action lawsuits in the Delaware Chancery Court. In January 2020, the Delaware Chancery Court consolidated the four lawsuits. In February 2020, the Delaware Chancery Court appointed California Public Employees’ Retirement System (“CalPERS”) as lead plaintiff for the consolidated action. Subsequently, in February 2020, CalPERS, together with Park Employees’ and Retirement Board Employees’ Annuity and Benefit Fund of Chicago and Louis M. Wilen, filed a First Amended Verified Class Action Complaint (as used in this paragraph, the “Complaint”) against NAI, NAI Entertainment Holdings LLC, Shari E. Redstone, the members of the special transaction committee of the Viacom Board of Directors (comprised of Thomas J. May, Judith A. McHale, Ronald L. Nelson and Nicole Seligman) and our President and Chief Executive Officer and director, Robert M. Bakish (as used in this paragraph, the “Viacom Litigation”). The Complaint alleges breaches of fiduciary duties to Viacom stockholders in connection with the negotiation and approval of the Merger Agreement. The Complaint seeks unspecified damages, costs and expenses, as well as other relief. In May 2020, the defendants filed motions to dismiss. In December 2020, the Delaware Chancery Court dismissed the claims against Mr. Bakish, while allowing the claims against the remaining defendants to proceed. In February 2023, the parties to the Viacom Litigation agreed to settle the Viacom Litigation on the terms and conditions set forth in a binding term sheet (the “Viacom Term Sheet”),
which was incorporated into a long-form settlement agreement entered into in March 2023 (the “Settlement Agreement”). The Viacom Term Sheet and Settlement Agreement provide for, among other things, the final dismissal of the Viacom Litigation in exchange for a settlement payment in the amount of $122.5 million, which we have recorded in "Other current liabilities" on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The settlement of the Viacom Litigation is subject to the final approval of the Delaware Chancery Court, and the vast majority of the settlement payment will be due no less than five business days before the final settlement hearing.
In August 2021, Camelot Event Driven Fund filed a putative securities class action lawsuit in New York Supreme Court, County of New York, and in November 2021, an amended complaint was filed that, among other changes, added an additional named plaintiff (as used in this paragraph, the “Complaint”). The Complaint is purportedly on behalf of investors who purchased shares of the Company’s Class B Common Stock and 5.75% Series A Mandatory Convertible Preferred Stock pursuant to public securities offerings completed in March 2021, and was filed against the Company, certain senior executives, members of our Board of Directors, and the underwriters involved in the offerings. The Complaint asserts violations of federal securities law and alleges that the offering documents contained material misstatements and omissions, including through an alleged failure to adequately disclose certain total return swap transactions involving Archegos Capital Management referenced to our securities and related alleged risks to the Company’s stock price. In December 2021, the plaintiffs filed a stipulation seeking the voluntary dismissal without prejudice of the outside director defendants from the lawsuit, which the Court subsequently ordered. On the same date, the defendants filed motions to dismiss the lawsuit, which were heard in January 2023. On February 7, 2023, the Court dismissed all claims against the Company while allowing the claims against the underwriters to proceed. The plaintiffs and underwriter defendants have appealed the ruling.
In September 2019, the Company was added as a defendant in a multi-district putative class action lawsuit filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois. The lawsuit was filed by parties that claim to have purchased broadcast television spot advertising beginning about January 2014 on television stations owned by one or more of the defendant television station owners and alleges the sharing of allegedly competitively sensitive information among such television stations in alleged violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act. The action, which names the Company among fourteen total defendants, seeks monetary damages, attorneys’ fees, costs and interest as well as injunctions against the allegedly unlawful conduct. In October 2019, the Company and other defendants filed a motion to dismiss the matter, which was denied by the Court in November 2020. We have reached an agreement in principle with the plaintiffs to settle the lawsuit. The settlement, which will include no admission of liability or wrongdoing by the Company, will be subject to Court approval.
We are a defendant in lawsuits claiming various personal injuries related to asbestos and other materials, which allegedly occurred as a result of exposure caused by various products manufactured by Westinghouse, a predecessor, generally prior to the early 1970s. Westinghouse was neither a producer nor a manufacturer of asbestos. We are typically named as one of a large number of defendants in both state and federal cases. In the majority of asbestos lawsuits, the plaintiffs have not identified which of our products is the basis of a claim. Claims against us in which a product has been identified most commonly relate to allegations of exposure to asbestos-containing insulating material used in conjunction with turbines and electrical equipment.
Claims are frequently filed and/or settled in groups, which may make the amount and timing of settlements, and the number of pending claims, subject to significant fluctuation from period to period. We do not report as pending those claims on inactive, stayed, deferred or similar dockets that some jurisdictions have established for claimants who allege minimal or no impairment. As of March 31, 2023, we had pending approximately 21,640 asbestos claims, as compared with approximately 21,580 as of December 31, 2022. During the first quarter of 2023, we received approximately 650 new claims and closed or moved to an inactive docket approximately 590 claims. We report claims as closed when we become aware that a dismissal order has been entered by a court or when we have reached agreement with the claimants on the material terms of a settlement. Settlement costs depend on the seriousness of the injuries that form the basis of the claims, the quality of evidence supporting the claims and other factors. Our total costs for the years 2022 and 2021 for settlement and defense of asbestos claims after insurance recoveries and net of tax were approximately $57 million and $63 million, respectively. Our costs for settlement and defense of asbestos claims may vary year to year and insurance proceeds are not always recovered in the same period as the insured portion of the expenses.Filings include claims for individuals suffering from mesothelioma, a rare cancer, the risk of which is allegedly increased by exposure to asbestos; lung cancer, a cancer which may be caused by various factors, one of which is alleged to be asbestos exposure; other cancers, and conditions that are substantially less serious, including claims brought on behalf of individuals who are asymptomatic as to an allegedly asbestos-related disease. The predominant number of pending claims against us are non-cancer claims. It is difficult to predict future asbestos liabilities, as events and circumstances may impact the estimate of our asbestos liabilities, including, among others, the number and types of claims and average cost to resolve such claims. We record an accrual for a loss contingency when it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and when the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Our liability estimate is based upon many factors, including the number of outstanding claims, estimated average cost per claim, the breakdown of claims by disease type, historic claim filings, costs per claim of resolution and the filing of new claims, as well as consultation with a third party firm on trends that may impact our future asbestos liability. While we believe that our accrual for matters related to our predecessor operations, including environmental and asbestos, are adequate, there can be no assurance that circumstances will not change in future periods, and as a result our actual liabilities may be higher or lower than our accrual.
From time to time, we receive claims from federal and state environmental regulatory agencies and other entities asserting that we are or may be liable for environmental cleanup costs and related damages principally relating to our historical and predecessor operations. In addition, from time to time we receive personal injury claims including toxic tort and product liability claims (other than asbestos) arising from our historical operations and predecessors.
See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
See Item 7, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Condition in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, for a discussion of our critical accounting policies.
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q contains both historical and forward‑looking statements, including statements related to our future results and performance. All statements that are not statements of historical fact are, or may be deemed to be, forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Similarly, statements that describe our objectives, plans or goals are or may be forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements reflect our current expectations concerning future results and events; generally can be identified by the use of statements that include phrases such as “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “foresee,” “likely,” “will,” “may,” “could,” “estimate” or other similar words or phrases; and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that are difficult to predict and which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these statements. These risks, uncertainties and other factors include, among others: risks related to our streaming business; the adverse impact on our advertising revenues as a result of changes in consumer viewership, advertising market conditions and deficiencies in audience measurement; risks related to operating in highly competitive industries, including cost increases; our ability to maintain attractive brands and  to offer popular content; changes in consumer behavior, as well as evolving technologies  and distribution models; the potential for loss of carriage or other reduction in or the impact of negotiations for the distribution of our content; damage to our reputation or brands; risks related to our ongoing investments in new businesses, products, services, technologies and other strategic activities; losses due to asset impairment charges for goodwill, intangible assets, FCC licenses and programming; risks related to environmental, social and governance (ESG) matters; evolving business continuity, cybersecurity, privacy and data protection and similar risks; content infringement; domestic and global political, economic and regulatory factors affecting our businesses generally; the impact of COVID-19 and other pandemics and measures taken in response thereto; liabilities related to discontinued operations and former businesses; the loss of existing or inability to hire new key employees or secure creative talent; strikes and other union activity; volatility in the price of our common stock; potential conflicts of interest arising from our ownership structure with a controlling stockholder; and other factors described in our news releases and filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including but not limited to our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K and reports on Form 10-Q and Form 8-K. There may be additional risks, uncertainties and factors that we do not currently view as material or that are not necessarily known. The forward‑looking statements included in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q are made only as of the date of this report, and we do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward‑looking statements to reflect subsequent events or circumstances.