
During the first quarter 2023, The Progressive Corporation’s insurance subsidiaries recognized strong growth in both premiums written and policies in force, compared to the same period last year, but the underwriting margin fell short of our goal to earn 4% on an aggregate calendar-year basis. Our combined ratio of 99.0 for the first quarter 2023 was 4.5 points higher than the same period last year. The variance from the prior year was due, in large part, to unfavorable prior accident years reserve development of 4.6 points for the first quarter 2023, compared to 1.6 points in the prior year first quarter. The development during the first quarter 2023 was primarily in our personal auto products and reflected higher than anticipated severity, more late reported injury claims than expected, and increased loss costs in Florida due, in part, to recently passed legislation in the state, as discussed below. During the first quarter 2023, companywide net premiums written grew 22% over the first quarter last year with all operating segments contributing to the growth. We generated $16.1 billion of net premiums written, which was an increase of $2.9 billion, compared to first quarter 2022. We ended the quarter with 28.8 million policies in force, which was an increase of 2.3 million policies, or 9%, over March 2022, and 1.4 million, or 5%, over year-end 2022. We believe that the growth during the quarter, in part, reflected our price competitiveness as many competitors continued to take rate increases. While growth is an important objective, achieving our target profit margin takes precedence over growing premiums. As discussed below, we plan to take actions that we believe are necessary to allow us to achieve our calendar-year underwriting profitability goal of 4%, which could result in less premium and policy growth.On a year-over-year basis, net income increased 43% for the first quarter 2023. This growth reflected increases in both our recurring investment income, which grew 73% over the first quarter last year, as well as recognizing $104.4 million of net holding period gains on our common equity portfolio this quarter, compared to $388.6 million of net holding period losses for the first quarter last year. These strong investment results were offset, in part, by a 78% decrease in our underwriting profit due to the reasons discussed above. For the first quarter 2023, we recognized comprehensive income of $1.1 billion, compared to a comprehensive loss of $1.1 billion in the same period last year. The fair value of our fixed-maturity securities increased by $0.6 billion during the first quarter, compared to a decrease in fair value of $1.4 billion for the first quarter 2022. The change in fair value reflected a modest decline in interest rates during the first quarter 2023, compared to a significant rise in interest rates in the first quarter last year. Total capital (debt plus shareholders’ equity) at March 31, 2023, was $23.3 billion, which was up $1.0 billion from year-end 2022, primarily due to our comprehensive income earned in the first quarter 2023. A. Insurance OperationsDuring the first quarter 2023, our Personal Lines and Commercial Lines businesses generated an underwriting profit margin of 1.3% and 1.6%, respectively. Our Property operating segment recognized a 5.5% underwriting loss margin during the quarter, which included 24.3 points due to the significant losses incurred from tornado, wind, and thunderstorm catastrophe losses. The special lines products profitability during the first quarter 2023 contributed about a favorable 2 points to the Personal Lines underwriting margin for the quarter. During the first quarter 2023, we experienced companywide unfavorable prior accident years reserve development of $621.2 million, or 4.6 points, as a result of claims settling for more than reserved and changes in our reserve estimates. Throughout the quarter, we continued to see volatility in our severity trends as the average costs to settle a claim increased over the same period last year. Nearly 70% of the unfavorable development was in our personal auto products and primarily resulted from higher than anticipated severity and increases in incurred losses on previously closed claims. For the first quarter 2023, our personal auto incurred severity was up about 10%, while accident frequency was relatively flat on a year-over-year basis. In addition, to a lesser extent, the unfavorable personal auto development reflected the impact of the recently passed legislation in Florida that resulted in a significant number of lawsuits being filed prior to its March 2023 effective date. While this tort reform could have a positive impact on the insurance industry in Florida in the long term, during the first quarter we increased our reserves for the potential exposure on existing claims, which had less than a one-point impact on our companywide combined ratio for the first quarter 2023. Since its passage, legislative efforts have arisen that, if adopted, could undo or dilute the potentially positive long-term benefits of the March legislation. We will continue to monitor the ever-changing regulatory environment and will respond as necessary. Our Commercial Lines business represented almost 25% of the unfavorable development and was mainly due to late reported claims from prior accident periods and changes in reserve estimates (e.g., aging of the reserves, changes to estimates by adjusters, and inflation factors). The remaining unfavorable development was primarily in our Property business with our special lines products experiencing minor unfavorable development during the quarter.During the first quarter 2023, we increased personal auto rates in 31 states, with an aggregate countrywide increase of about 4% and we continue to earn in the aggregate countrywide net increases of 13% that we took during 2022. Returning to profitability in our Property business continues to remain a priority for us. In addition to our focus on shifting our concentration mix between states, we continued to adjust rates to address profitability concerns. In the first quarter 2023, we increased rates by about 3% across our Property product lines, bringing the trailing four quarters close to an aggregate rate increase of about 20%. As stated above, we strongly believe that achieving our target profit margin takes precedence over growing premiums. With focus on achieving our calendar-year underwriting profitability goal of 4% and the fact that inflation has not abated, we are re-evaluating our rate plans and intend to be aggressive with raising rates over the remainder of the year in both our personal and commercial auto products. Of course, some of these rate increases will be subject to regulatory approval. We will also continue to monitor the factors that could impact our loss costs for both our vehicle and Property businesses, which can include new and used car prices, miles driven, driving patterns, loss severity, weather events, building materials, constructions costs, inflation, and other components, on a state-by-state basis, and these factors could change our current plans for rate increases. In addition, we routinely monitor our advertising spend and have recently begun to reduce these costs based on performance against our underwriting targets in certain markets and in certain types of advertising. As a result of these actions to address profitability, growth in premiums and/or policies in force could be adversely impacted.For the first quarter 2023, net premiums written grew 22% on a companywide basis over the same period last year, primarily driven by new business applications and rate increases that continued through the first quarter 2023. Personal Lines grew 25%, Commercial Lines 15%, and Property 17%. Changes in net premiums written are a function of new business applications (i.e., policies sold), premium per policy, and retention. The Personal Lines increase reflected growth in both our Agency and Direct businesses. On a year-over-year basis, new personal auto applications grew 83% for the first quarter 2023, compared to the first quarter 2022. During the quarter, we believe increased advertising spend and competitor rate increases spurred the new personal auto application growth, compared to the decreases in new auto applications experienced during the first half of 2022 when we took significant rate increases and reduced our advertising spend to focus on profitability. The increase in net premiums written in our Commercial Lines business reflected growth in our transportation network company (TNC) business, due to rate increases on the renewal of certain TNC policies, an increase in projected mileage (which is the basis for determining premiums written for this business), and writing new TNC policies in three additional states. Excluding the growth from the TNC business, our Commercial Lines net premiums written growth was relatively flat for the first quarter 2023, compared to the same period last year. All of our business market targets (BMTs) experienced growth during the quarter, except our for-hire transportation BMT that reflected the continued slowdown in the rate of economic activity and deteriorating freight market conditions. We have concentrated our recent growth in the Property business in markets that are less susceptible to catastrophes and have lower exposure to coastal and hail-prone states. New applications in the states where we are focused on growth were up about 30% over the first quarter last year. In regions where our appetite to write new business is limited, we are prioritizing Progressive auto bundles, as well as lower risk properties, such as new construction or homes with newer roofs. New applications were down about 10% in these more volatile weather states. In addition, the Property business benefited from growth in Robinsons, our bundled auto and home policies. In total, Property new applications were up 12% over the first quarter 2022. During the quarter, the number of quotes and the rate of conversion increased in both the Direct auto and Agency auto channels, which contributed to the 83% increase in total personal auto new business applications on a year-over-year basis. This growth reflects that our competitors continued to raise rates to address their underwriting profitability issues. In addition, during the first quarter 2023, we increased advertising spend, which had a positive impact on our competitive positioning that we believe contributed to our new business application growth. We believe a key element in improving the accuracy of our rating is Snapshot®, our usage-based insurance offering. During the first quarter 2023, the adoption rates for consumers enrolling in the program increased about 40% in Agency auto and nearly 20% in Direct auto, compared to the first quarter 2022. Snapshot is available in all states, other than California, and our latest segmentation model was available in states that represented about 45% of our countrywide personal auto premium at March 31, 2023. We continue to invest in our mobile application, with mobile devices being chosen for Snapshot monitoring for the majority of new enrollments.During the first quarter 2023, on a year-over-year basis, average written premiums per policy grew 8% in personal auto, 1% in commercial auto, and 10% in Property. The growth primarily reflected rate increases taken throughout 2022 that continued into the first quarter 2023, in response to rising loss costs. Given that our commercial auto and Property policies are predominately written for 12-month terms, compared to primarily 6-month policies in our personal auto business, rate actions take longer to earn in for these products. We realize that to grow policies in force, it is critical that we retain our customers for longer periods. Consequently, increasing retention continues to be one of our most important priorities. Our efforts to increase our share of multi-product households remains a key initiative and we will continue to make investments to improve the customer experience in order to support that goal. Policy life expectancy, which is our actuarial estimate of the average length of time that a policy will remain in force before cancellation or lapse in coverage, is our primary measure of customer retention in our Personal Lines, Commercial Lines, and Property businesses.We evaluate total auto retention using a trailing 12-month and a trailing 3-month policy life expectancy. The latter can reflect more volatility and is more sensitive to seasonality. As of the end of the first quarter 2023, our trailing 12-month total personal auto policy life expectancy decreased 16%, compared to last year. The Agency channel trailing 12-month measure was down 19% and the Direct channel was down 14%. We believe that the decreases in our trailing 12-month policy life expectancy primarily reflects the impact of the rate actions we have taken in prior years. Future rate increases could also adversely impact our retention. Although retention is still down from the prior year, we have seen improvement in our trailing 12-month policy life expectancy over the last several months. Our trailing 3-month policy life expectancy for total personal auto was up 10%, compared to the same period last year. At the end of the first quarter 2023, our special lines trailing 12-month policy life expectancy increased 3%, Commercial Lines decreased 14%, and Property was flat, compared to the same period last year. The decrease in Commercial Lines was across all BMTs, but was primarily due to a decrease in for-hire transportation BMT demand.B. InvestmentsThe fair value of our investment portfolio was $56.7 billion at March 31, 2023, compared to $53.5 billion at December 31, 2022. The increase from year-end 2022 reflects solid cash flows from operations and valuation increases in nearly all portfolio sectors. Our asset allocation strategy is to maintain 0%-25% of our portfolio in Group I securities, with the balance (75%-100%) of our portfolio in Group II securities (the securities allocated to Group I and II are defined below under Results of Operations – Investments). At March 31, 2023, 9% of our portfolio was allocated to Group I securities and 91% to Group II securities, compared to 10% and 90%, respectively, at December 31, 2022. Our recurring investment income generated a pretax book yield of 3.0% for the first quarter 2023, compared to 2.0% for the same period in 2022, due to the increase in interest rates on our floating-rate securities and the investment of cash and maturities at relatively higher interest rates. Our investment portfolio produced a fully taxable equivalent (FTE) total return of 2.3% and (3.8)% for the first quarter 2023 and 2022, respectively. Our fixed-income and common stock portfolios had FTE total returns of 2.0% and 7.3%, respectively, for the first quarter 2023, compared to (3.6)% and (4.9)%, respectively, last year. The increase in the fixed-income return reflected portfolio valuation increases as interest rates declined during first quarter 2023. The common stock return increase reflected general market conditions.At March 31, 2023, the fixed-income portfolio had a weighted average credit quality of AA and a duration of 3.0 years, compared to AA- and 3.1 years at March 31, 2022, and AA and 2.9 years at December 31, 2022. The London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) will cease as an official reference rate on June 30, 2023. The Federal Reserve Board identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) as the recommended replacement to U.S. LIBOR. As of March 31, 2023, we owned 164 unique securities with an aggregate par value of $3.3 billion that are still based on LIBOR, with our other asset-backed securities, mainly collateralized loan obligations, making up the majority of these securities. Due to the provisions in the terms of the securities, which allows a change in the underlying rate if a rate is discontinued, we are expecting a relatively smooth transition to an alternate reference rate.
Progressive’s insurance operations create liquidity by collecting and investing premiums from new and renewal business in advance of paying claims. As primarily an auto insurer, our claims liabilities generally have a short-term duration. Operations generated positive cash flows of $2.4 billion and $2.5 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. We believe cash flows will remain positive in the reasonably foreseeable future and do not expect we will have a need to raise capital to support our operations in that timeframe, although changes in market or regulatory conditions affecting the insurance industry, or other unforeseen events, may necessitate otherwise.As of March 31, 2023, we held $29.9 billion in short-term investments and U.S. Treasury securities, which represented 53% of our total portfolio. Based on our portfolio allocation and investment strategies, we believe
that we have sufficient readily available marketable securities to cover our claims payments and short-term obligations in the event our cash flow from operations were to be negative. While U.S. Treasury securities are viewed as having lower risk than many other investment opportunities, the U.S. Treasury announced it had reached its authorized borrowing limit and defaults under government obligations, including payments related to U.S. Treasury securities, could occur as soon as this summer. Although perhaps unlikely, it is possible that the federal government could fail to raise the federal debt ceiling to avoid default. Any such default would likely have a materially adverse impact on our cash flows and the value of our portfolio and our capital position. See
in our Form 10-K filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission for the year ended December 31, 2022 for a discussion of certain matters that may affect our portfolio and capital position.
Our total capital (debt plus shareholders’ equity) was $23.3 billion, at book value, at March 31, 2023, compared to $23.4 billion at March 31, 2022, and $22.3 billion at December 31, 2022. The increase from December primarily reflected the comprehensive income recognized during the first quarter 2023, primarily driven by the market impact on the valuation of our investment portfolio. Our debt-to-total capital ratio was 27.5% at March 31, 2023, 27.2% at March 31, 2022, and 28.7% at December 31, 2022, and, in each case, consistent with our financial policy of maintaining a ratio of less than 30%. While our financial policies include a goal of maintaining debt below 30% of total capital at book value, we recognize that various factors, including rising interest rates, widening credits spreads, declines in the equity markets, or erosion in operating results, may result in that ratio exceeding 30% at times. In such a situation, as we did during 2022, we may choose to remain above 30% for some time, dependent upon market conditions and the capital needs of our operating businesses. We will continue to monitor this ratio, market conditions, and our capital needs going forward.None of the covenants on our outstanding debt securities include rating or credit triggers that would require an adjustment of interest rates or an acceleration of principal payments in the event that our debt securities are downgraded by a rating agency. In April 2023, we amended the unsecured discretionary line of credit (the Line of Credit) with PNC Bank, National Association, and raised the maximum principal amount to $300 million from the previous amount of $250 million, with a new interest rate of 1-month term SOFR plus 1.10%. We did not engage in short-term borrowings, including any borrowings under our Line of Credit, to fund our operations or for liquidity purposes during the reported periods.During the first three months of 2023, we returned capital to shareholders primarily through common share dividends and common share repurchases. In March 2023, our Board
of Directors declared a $0.10 per common share dividend, or $58.5 million in the aggregate, that was paid in April 2023. In January 2023, we also paid common share dividends declared in the fourth quarter 2022, in the aggregate amount of $58.5 million, or $0.10 per share (see Note 9 – Dividends for further discussion). In addition to the common share dividends, in March 2023, we paid Series B Preferred Share dividends in the aggregate amount of $13.4 million.Consistent with our financial policies, we repurchase common shares to neutralize dilution from equity-based compensation granted during the year and opportunistically when we believe our shares are trading below our determination of long-term fair value. During the first quarter 2023, we repurchased 0.2 million common shares, at a total cost of $32.7 million, to satisfy tax withholding obligations in connection with the vesting of equity awards under our equity compensation plans. We will continue to make decisions on returning capital to shareholders based on the strength of our overall capital position, the capital strength of our subsidiaries, and potential capital needs to expand our business operations.We seek to deploy capital in a prudent manner and use multiple data sources and modeling tools to estimate the frequency, severity, and correlation of identified exposures, including, but not limited to, catastrophic and other insured losses, natural disasters, and other significant business interruptions, to estimate our potential capital needs.Based upon our capital planning and forecasting efforts, we believe we have sufficient capital resources and cash flows from operations to support our current business, scheduled principal and interest payments on our debt, anticipated quarterly dividends on our common shares and dividends on our Series B Preferred Shares, our contractual obligations, and other expected capital requirements for the foreseeable future. At March 31, 2023, we had $4.1 billion in a consolidated, non-insurance subsidiary of the holding company that can be used to fund corporate obligations and provide additional capital to the insurance subsidiaries to fund potential future growth. As of March 31, 2023, our estimated consolidated statutory surplus was $18.5 billion.During the first three months of 2023, our contractual obligations and critical accounting policies have not changed materially from those discussed in our 2022 Annual Report to Shareholders. There have not been any material changes in off-balance-sheet leverage, which includes purchase obligations and catastrophe excess of loss reinsurance contracts, from those disclosed in our 2022 Annual Report to Shareholders.We may decide to raise additional capital to take advantage of attractive terms in the market and provide additional financial flexibility. We have an effective shelf registration with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission so that we may periodically offer and sell an indeterminate aggregate amount of senior or subordinated debt securities,
preferred stock, depository shares, common stock, purchase contracts, warrants, and units. The shelf registration enables us to raise funds from the offering of any securities covered by the shelf registration as well as any combination thereof, subject to market conditions.
We report our underwriting operations in three segments: Personal Lines, Commercial Lines, and Property. As a component of our Personal Lines segment, we report our Agency and Direct business results to provide further understanding of our products by distribution channel.The following table shows the composition of our companywide net premiums written, by segment, for the respective periods:
1 Personal auto products accounted for 95% of the total Personal Lines segment net premiums written during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, and our special lines products accounted for the balance.Our Personal Lines business writes insurance for personal autos and special lines products (e.g., motorcycles, RVs, watercraft, and snowmobiles). Within Personal Lines, we often refer to our four consumer segments, which we refer to as:•Sam - inconsistently insured;•Diane - consistently insured and maybe a renter;•Wrights - homeowners who do not bundle auto and home; and•Robinsons - homeowners who bundle auto and home.
While our personal auto policies are primarily written for 6-month terms, we write 12-month auto policies in our Platinum agencies to promote bundled auto and home growth. At March 31, 2023 and 2022, 14% of our Agency auto policies in force were 12-month policies. To the extent our Agency application mix of annual policies grows, the shift in policy term could increase our written premium mix by channel as 12-month policies have about twice the amount of net premiums written compared to 6-month policies. Our special lines products are written for 12-month terms. Our Commercial Lines business writes auto-related liability and physical damage insurance, business-related general liability and property insurance predominately for small businesses, and workers’ compensation insurance primarily for the transportation industry. The majority of our Commercial Lines business is written through the independent agency channel although we continue to focus on growing our direct business. To serve our direct channel customers, we continue to expand our product offerings, including adding states where we offer our business owners policy (BOP) product, as well as adding these product offerings to our digital platform that serves direct small business consumers (BusinessQuote Explorer®). The direct commercial auto business, excluding our TNC business and Protective Insurance Corporation and subsidiaries (Protective Insurance), represented 11% of our commercial auto premiums written for the first quarter 2023, compared to 10% for the first quarter 2022. We write about 90% of Commercial Lines policies for 12-month terms.Our Property business writes residential property insurance for homeowners, other property owners, renters, and umbrella products. We write the majority of our Property business through the independent agency channel. We continue to expand the direct distribution of our Property product offerings and, for the first quarter 2023, about a quarter of our Property business premiums were written in the direct channel. All of our Property policies are written for 12-month terms.
Profitability for our underwriting operations is defined by pretax underwriting profit or loss, which is calculated as net premiums earned plus fees and other revenues less losses and loss adjustment expenses, policy acquisition costs, and other underwriting expenses. We also use underwriting margin, which is underwriting profit or loss expressed as a percentage of net premiums earned, to analyze our results. For the respective periods, our underwriting profitability results were as follows:
1 For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, pretax profit (loss) includes $5.0 million and $14.1 million, respectively, of amortization expense associated with acquisition-related intangible assets attributable to our Property segment. The year-over-year decrease in amortization expense reflects intangible assets that were fully amortized during the first quarter 2022.2 Underwriting margins for our other indemnity businesses are not meaningful (NM) due to the low level of premiums earned by, and the variability of loss costs in, such businesses.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, the lower pretax underwriting profit, compared to the same period last year, primarily reflects the impact from unfavorable prior accident years reserve development and catastrophe losses incurred. During the first quarter 2023, we experienced unfavorable prior accident years reserve development of 4.6 points, compared to 1.6 points for the first quarter last year. We have continued to see volatility in our severity trends as inflation continued to influence higher vehicle prices and costs to repair vehicles. Our catastrophe losses reduced our underwriting profitability 1.8 points for the quarter, compared to 1.2 points in the first quarter 2022.See the Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses (LAE) section below for further discussion of our frequency and severity trends, reserve development and catastrophe losses incurred during the periods.Further underwriting results for our Personal Lines business, including results by distribution channel, the Commercial Lines business, the Property business, and our underwriting operations in total, were as follows:
1 Ratios are expressed as a percentage of net premiums earned. The portion of fees and other revenues related to our loss adjustment activities are netted against loss adjustment expenses and the portion of fees and other revenues related to our underwriting operations are netted against underwriting expenses in the ratio calculations.2 Included in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, are 0.8 points and 2.5 points, respectively, of amortization expense on acquisition-related intangible assets attributable to our Property segment.3 The accident year ratios include only the losses that occurred during the period noted. As a result, accident period results will change over time, either favorably or unfavorably, as we revise our estimates of loss costs when payments are made or reserves for that accident period are reviewed.
Claims costs, our most significant expense, represent payments made and estimated future payments to be made, to or on behalf of our policyholders, including expenses needed to adjust or settle claims. Claims costs are a function of loss severity and frequency and, for our vehicle businesses, are influenced by inflation and driving patterns, among other factors, some of which are discussed below. In our Property business, severity is primarily a function of
construction costs and the age of the structure. Accordingly, anticipated changes in these factors are taken into account when we establish premium rates and loss reserves. Loss reserves are estimates of future costs and our reserves are adjusted as underlying assumptions change and information develops.Our total loss and LAE ratio increased 3.4 points for the first quarter 2023, compared to the same period last year, primarily due to increased severity, unfavorable prior accident years reserve development, and higher catastrophe losses, in all of our operating segments, partially offset by the higher premium per policy due to rate increases. On an accident year basis, our first quarter loss and LAE ratio was 0.4 points higher than the first quarter 2022.
The following table shows our consolidated catastrophe losses and related combined ratio point impact, excluding loss adjustment expenses, incurred during the periods:
1 Represents catastrophe losses incurred during the period, including the impact of reinsurance, as a percent of net premiums earned for each segment.
In the first quarter 2023, we were affected by 24 catastrophic weather events, compared to 11 events in the first quarter 2022. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the majority of our catastrophe losses were due to tornadoes, thunderstorms, and hail throughout the United States. Netted against our catastrophe losses for the quarter was about a $40 million, or 0.3 points on a companywide basis, reduction to the loss estimate for Hurricane Ian in our vehicle businesses. There was no change to our estimate of the ultimate loss and allocated loss adjustment expenses (ALAE) from Hurricane Ian for our Property business during the first quarter 2023. We have responded, and plan to continue to respond, promptly to catastrophic events when they occur in order to provide exemplary claims service to our customers. Changes in our estimate of our ultimate losses on current catastrophes along with potential future catastrophes could have a material impact on our financial condition, cash flows, or results of operations. We reinsure various risks including, but not limited to, catastrophic losses. We do not have catastrophe-specific reinsurance for our Personal Lines or commercial auto businesses, but we reinsure portions of our Property business. The Property business reinsurance programs include catastrophe occurrence excess of loss contracts and aggregate excess of loss contracts. We also purchase non-weather-related catastrophe reinsurance on our Protective Insurance workers’ compensation insurance.
We evaluate our reinsurance programs during the renewal process, if not more frequently, to ensure our programs continue to effectively address the company’s risk tolerance. During the first quarter 2023, we entered into a new aggregate excess of loss reinsurance contract that has multiple layers of coverage, with the first retention layer threshold ranging from $500 million to $575 million, excluding named tropical storms and hurricanes, and the second retention layer threshold of $600 million, including named tropical storms and hurricanes. The first and second layers provide coverage up to $100 million and $85 million, respectively. While the total coverage limit and per-event retention will evolve to fit the growth of our business, we expect to remain a consistent purchaser of reinsurance coverage. See
in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, for a discussion of our various reinsurance programs. During the first quarter 2023, we did not exceed the annual retention thresholds under our 2023 catastrophe aggregate excess of loss program.
The following discussion of our severity and frequency trends in our personal auto business excludes comprehensive coverage because of its inherent volatility, as it is typically linked to catastrophic losses generally resulting from adverse weather. For our commercial auto products, the reported frequency and severity trends include comprehensive coverage. Comprehensive coverage
insures against damage to a customer’s vehicle due to various causes other than collision, such as windstorm, hail, theft, falling objects, and glass breakage.Total personal auto incurred severity (i.e., average cost per claim, including both paid losses and the change in case reserves) on a calendar-year basis, over the prior-year period was as follows:
The year-over-year increase in severity, in part, reflects the impact of inflation, which continues to increase the valuation of used vehicles and total loss, repair, and medical costs.To address inherent seasonality trends and lessen the effects of month-to-month variability in the commercial auto products, we use a trailing 12-month period in assessing severity. In the first quarter 2023, our commercial auto products’ incurred severity, excluding Protective Insurance and our TNC business, increased 5%, compared to the same period last year. Since the loss patterns in the TNC and Protective Insurance businesses are not indicative of our other commercial auto products, disclosing severity and frequency trends excluding those businesses is more representative of our overall experience for the majority of our commercial auto products.It is a challenge to estimate future severity, but we continue to monitor changes in the underlying costs, such as general
inflation, used car prices, vehicle repair costs, medical costs, health care reform, court decisions, and jury verdicts, along with regulatory changes and other factors that may affect severity. Our personal auto incurred frequency, on a calendar-year basis, over the prior-year period, was as follows:
On a trailing 12-month basis, our commercial auto products’ incurred frequency, excluding Protective Insurance and our TNC business, increased 2% during the first quarter 2023, compared to the same period last year. We closely monitor the changes in frequency, but the degree or direction of near-term frequency change is not something that we are able to predict with any certainty. We will continue to analyze trends to distinguish changes in our experience from other external factors, such as changes in the number of vehicles per household, miles driven, vehicle usage, gasoline prices, advances in vehicle safety, and unemployment rates, versus those resulting from shifts in the mix of our business or changes in driving patterns, to allow us to react quickly to price for these trends and to reserve more accurately for our loss exposures.
The table below presents the actuarial adjustments implemented and the loss reserve development experienced on a companywide basis in the following periods:
Total development consists of both actuarial adjustments and “all other development” on prior accident years. The actuarial adjustments represent the net changes made by our actuarial staff to both current and prior accident year reserves based on regularly scheduled reviews. Through these reviews, our actuaries identify and measure variances in the projected frequency and severity trends, which allow them to adjust the reserves to reflect the current cost trends. For our Property business, 100% of catastrophe losses are reviewed monthly, and any development on catastrophe reserves are included as part of the actuarial adjustments. For the Personal Lines and Commercial Lines businesses, development for catastrophe losses in the vehicle businesses would be reflected in “all other development,” discussed below, to the extent they relate to prior year reserves. We report these actuarial adjustments separately for the current and prior accident years to reflect these adjustments as part of the total prior accident years development.“All other development” represents claims settling for more or less than reserved, emergence of unrecorded claims at rates different than anticipated in our incurred but not recorded (IBNR) reserves, and changes in reserve estimates on specific claims. Although we believe the development from both the actuarial adjustments and “all other development” generally results from the same factors, we are unable to quantify the portion of the reserve development that might be applicable to any one or more of those underlying factors.About 70% of the total unfavorable development was in our personal auto products and primarily reflects higher than anticipated severity in auto property and physical damage coverages, higher than anticipated late reported injury claims, and increased loss costs in Florida injury and medical coverages. Part of the changes in Florida losses are due to the impact of recently passed legislation in Florida, which had less than a 1.0 point impact on the combined ratio for the first quarter 2023.Our Commercial Lines business represented almost 25% of the unfavorable development for the quarter and was mainly due to higher than anticipated severity of injury case reserves and higher than anticipated severity and frequency of late reported injury claims. The remaining unfavorable development for the first quarter 2023, was primarily in our Property business, and mostly due to higher than anticipated claims expenses and higher than anticipated severity in our homeowner liability peril and umbrella products.Our objective is to establish case and IBNR reserves that are adequate to cover all loss costs, while incurring minimal variation from the date the reserves are initially established until losses are fully developed. Our ability to meet this objective is impacted by many factors. Changes in case law, particularly in case law related to personal injury protection, can make it difficult to estimate reserves timely and with minimal variation. See Note 6 – Loss and Loss Adjustment Expense Reserves, for a more detailed discussion of our prior accident years development and Critical Accounting Policies in our 2022 Annual Report to Shareholders for discussion of the application of estimates and assumptions in the establishment of our loss reserves.Underwriting ExpensesUnderwriting expenses include policy acquisition costs and other underwriting expenses. The underwriting expense ratio is our underwriting expenses, net of certain fees and other revenues, expressed as a percentage of net premiums earned. For the first quarter 2023, our underwriting expense ratio was up 1.1 points, compared to the same period last year, primarily reflecting increases in our employee-related costs and advertising spend. In total, our companywide advertising spend increased 23%, or 0.4 points, compared to the first quarter 2022. As we continue to focus on profitability, we monitor advertising spend and will reduce these costs based on performance against our underwriting targets in certain markets and in certain types of advertising.To analyze underwriting expenses, we also review our non-acquisition expense ratio (NAER), which excludes costs related to policy acquisition, including advertising and agency commissions, from our underwriting expense ratio. During the first quarter 2023, our NAER increased 0.6 points, 2.0 points, and 1.2 points in our Personal Lines, Commercial Lines, and Property businesses, respectively, compared to the same period last year.
For our underwriting operations, we analyze growth in terms of both premiums and policies. Net premiums written represent the premiums from policies written during the period, less any premiums ceded to reinsurers. Net premiums earned, which are a function of the premiums written in the current and prior periods, are earned as revenue over the life of the policy using a daily earnings convention. Policies in force, our preferred measure of growth since it removes the variability due to rate changes or mix shifts, represents all policies under which coverage was in effect as of the end of the period specified.
To analyze growth, we review new policies, rate levels, and the retention characteristics of our segments. Although new policies are necessary to maintain a growing book of business, we recognize the importance of retaining our current customers as a critical component of our continued growth.As shown in the tables below, we measure retention by policy life expectancy. We review our customer retention for our personal auto products using both a trailing 3-month and a trailing 12-month period. We believe changes in policy life expectancy using a trailing 12-month period measure is indicative of recent experience, mitigates the effects of month-to-month variability, and addresses seasonality. Although using a trailing 3-month measure is sensitive to seasonality and can reflect more volatility, this measure is more responsive to current experience and generally can be an indicator of how our retention rates are moving.
The following table shows our year-over-year changes for our Personal Lines business:
In our Personal Lines business, we experienced significant quote volume and new application growth in the first quarter 2023, which we believe was, in part, driven by competitor rate increases and increased media spend. The increase in new applications during the first quarter 2023 were primarily attributable to our personal auto products although we also had new application growth in our special lines products.Personal auto policies in force grew between 7% and 12% across all four consumer segments during the first quarter 2023, compared to the same period last year. New business auto application growth was also up significantly across all segments during the quarter.During the first quarter 2023, on a countrywide basis, we implemented personal auto rate increases in 31 states that, in the aggregate, increased rates about 4%, following rate increases of 13% during 2022. We believe that our prior year rate increases had a negative impact on our renewal business applications and trailing 12-month policy life expectancy. As competitors raised rates, our retention started to lengthen as evidenced by the growth in our trailing 3-month policy life expectancy.
Our written premium per policy increased during the first quarter 2023, primarily due to the rate increases taken in 2022, as previously discussed. Our focus on achieving our target underwriting profitability takes precedence over growth. We will continue to manage growth and profitability in accordance with our long-standing goal of growing as fast as we can, as long as we can provide great customer service, at or below a companywide 96 combined ratio on a calendar-year basis.We report our Agency and Direct business results separately as components of our Personal Lines segment to provide further understanding of our products by distribution channel. The channel discussions below are focused on personal auto insurance since this product accounted for 95% of the Personal Lines segment net premiums written during the first quarter 2023.
The Agency business includes business written by more than 40,000 independent insurance agencies that represent Progressive, as well as brokerages in New York and California. During the first quarter 2023, 49 states and the District of Columbia generated new Agency auto application growth, including all of our top 10 largest Agency states. During the first quarter 2023, total auto applications increased 8%, due to growth in new applications. During the first quarter, each of our consumer segments experienced a significant increase in new applications year over year. Policies in force grew by single digit percentages in each consumer segment, except Sams who were flat, compared to the same period last year.During the first quarter 2023, we experienced an increase in Agency auto quote volume of 14% and a 49% increase in the rate of conversion (i.e., converting a quote to a sale), with both increasing in each consumer segment. Written premium per policy for new and renewal Agency auto business increased 13% and 10%, respectively, compared to the first quarter 2022. The decrease in the trailing 12-month policy life expectancy was expected given the rate actions taken over the last year, while the increase in the trailing 3-month policy life expectancy shows what we believe to be our increased competitiveness in the marketplace.
The Direct business includes business written directly by Progressive online, through our Progressive mobile app, and over the phone. During the first quarter 2023, 48 states and the District of Columbia generated new auto application growth, including nine of our top 10 largest Direct states. During the first quarter 2023, total auto applications increased 19%, primarily due to growth in new applications. During the first quarter, each of our consumer segments experienced a significant increase in new applications year over year. Policies in force grew between 10% and 20% in each consumer segment, compared to the same period last year.During the first quarter 2023, Direct auto quote volume increased 73% and conversion increased 13%, compared to the same period last year, with both increasing in each consumer segment. Despite taking rate increases, the increase we experienced in our quote volume primarily reflected competitors raising rates and our increased advertising spend compared to the first quarter 2022.During the first quarter 2023, written premium per policy for new and renewal Direct auto business increased 7% and 9%, respectively, compared to the same period last year, primarily driven by rate increases. Consistent with our Agency business, the Direct business decrease in policy life expectancy for the trailing 12-months reflects the rate actions taken over the last year and the increase in the trailing 3-month measure shows what we believe to be our increased competitiveness in the marketplace.
Our Commercial Lines business operates in five traditional business markets, which include business auto, for-hire transportation, contractor, for-hire specialty, and tow markets, primarily written through the agency channel. We also write TNC business, BOP insurance, and, through Protective Insurance, larger fleet and workers’ compensation insurance for trucking, along with trucking industry independent contractors, and affinity programs. The following table and discussion shows our commercial auto product, excluding our TNC, BOP, and Protective Insurance products. Year-over-year changes in our commercial auto product were as follows:
During the first quarter 2023, commercial auto new application growth was positive in each of our business market targets, except for the for-hire transportation market, which reflects the continued slowdown in the rate of economic activity and deteriorating freight market conditions. During the first quarter 2023, we experienced a 3% increase in quote volume and a decrease of 1% in the rate of conversion, compared to the same period last year.During the first quarter 2023, written premium per policy for new commercial auto business decreased 7%, while renewal business increased 6%, compared to the same period last year. The increase in written premiums were primarily due to rate increases and were partially offset by shifts in the mix of business. Our policy life expectancy decreased in all business market targets, primarily driven by our for-hire transportation business market. Given the rise in costs to operate a trucking business, many independent owner/operators, who were our core customers in the for-hire transportation business market, have begun to migrate back to leasing with larger motor carriers.
The following table shows our year-over-year changes for our Property business:
Our Property business writes residential property insurance for homeowners, other property owners, and renters, and umbrella insurance in the agency and direct channels. During the first quarter 2023, the increase in new applications experienced in our Property business was primarily due to underwriting changes made in an effort to promote growth in less volatile weather states and increased advertising spending.Improving profitability and reducing concentration exposure continued to be the top priority for our Property business during the first quarter 2023. We have concentrated our growth in the Property business in markets that are less susceptible to catastrophes and have lower exposure to coastal and hail-prone states. New applications in these growth-oriented states were up about 30% over the first quarter last year. In regions where our appetite to write new business is limited, we are prioritizing Progressive auto bundles, as well as lower risk properties, such as new construction or homes with newer roofs. New applications were down just over 10% in these more volatile weather states. In addition, we increased rates an average of about 3% in our Property segment during the first quarter 2023.The increase in our written premium per policy, compared to the first quarter last year, was primarily due to rate increases taken over the last 12 months and providing higher premium coverages to account for inflation. The written premium per policy increase was partially offset by a shift in the mix of business to a larger share of renters policies, which have lower written premiums per policy, and less homeowners growth in volatile states that have higher average premiums. We intend to continue to make targeted rate increases in states where we believe it is necessary to achieve our profitability targets.
G. Income TaxesAt March 31, 2023 and 2022, and December 31, 2022, we had net current income taxes payable of $203.3 million, $201.1 million, and $10.9 million, respectively, which were reported in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. The increase in the payable balance at March 31, 2023 and 2022, compared to December 31, 2022, in part reflects that first quarter estimated payments are not due until the second quarter of the year.A deferred tax asset or liability is a tax benefit or expense, respectively, that is expected to be realized in a future tax return. At March 31, 2023 and 2022, and December 31, 2022, we reported net federal deferred tax assets of $1.1 billion, $0.4 billion, and $1.1 billion, respectively. We are required to assess our deferred tax assets for recoverability and, based on our analysis, determined that we did not need a valuation allowance on our gross deferred tax assets in each period. Although realization of the gross deferred tax assets is not assured, management believes it is more likely than not that the gross deferred tax assets will be realized based on our expectation we will be able to fully utilize the deductions that are ultimately recognized for tax purposes. We believe our deferred tax assets related to net unrealized losses on fixed-maturity securities will be realized based on the existence of prior year capital gains, current temporary differences related to unrealized gains in our equity portfolio, and other tax planning strategies.Our effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was 19.2%, compared to 19.6% for the same period last year. Consistent with prior years, we had no uncertain tax positions. See Note 5 – Income Taxes for further information.
Our management philosophy governing the portfolio is to evaluate investment results on a total return basis. The fully taxable equivalent (FTE) total return includes recurring investment income, adjusted to a fully taxable amount for certain securities that receive preferential tax treatment (e.g., municipal securities), and total net realized, and changes in total net unrealized, gains (losses) on securities.The following table summarizes investment results for the periods ended March 31:
The increase in the book yield, compared to last year, primarily reflected investing new cash from operations and proceeds from maturing bonds at higher interest rates and an increase in interest rates on our floating-rate securities. The increase in the fixed-income total return, compared to last year, reflected the impact of declining interest rates, while the increase in common stocks reflected general market conditions.A further break-down of our FTE total returns for our fixed-income portfolio for the periods ended March 31, follows:
The composition of the investment portfolio was:
1 Represents ratings at period end. Credit quality ratings are assigned by nationally recognized statistical rating organizations. To calculate the weighted average credit quality ratings, we weight individual securities based on fair value and assign a numeric score of 0-5, with non-investment-grade and non-rated securities assigned a score of 0-1. To the extent the weighted average of the ratings falls between AAA and AA+, we assign an internal rating of AAA-.2 At March 31, 2023 and 2022, we had $22.8 million, and $356.0 million, respectively, of net unsettled security purchase transactions included in other liabilities, compared to $34.4 million included in other assets at December 31, 2022.  The total fair value of the portfolio at March 31, 2023 and 2022, and December 31, 2022, included $4.1 billion, $5.1 billion, and $4.4 billion, respectively, of securities held in a consolidated, non-insurance subsidiary of the holding company, net of unsettled security transactions.Our asset allocation strategy is to maintain 0%-25% of our portfolio in Group I securities, with the balance (75%-100%) of our portfolio in Group II securities.We define Group I securities to include:•common equities,•nonredeemable preferred stocks,•redeemable preferred stocks, except for 50% of investment-grade redeemable preferred stocks with cumulative dividends, which are included in Group II, and•all other non-investment-grade fixed-maturity securities.Group II securities include:•short-term securities, and•all other fixed-maturity securities, including 50% of the investment-grade redeemable preferred stocks with cumulative dividends.We believe this asset allocation strategy allows us to appropriately assess the risks associated with these securities for capital purposes and is in line with the treatment by our regulators. The following table shows the composition of our Group I and Group II securities:
1 We did not hold any non-investment-grade redeemable preferred stocks at March 31, 2023 and 2022, or December 31, 2022.To determine the allocation between Group I and Group II, we use the credit ratings from models provided by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) to classify our residential and commercial mortgage-backed securities, excluding interest-only (IO) securities, and the credit ratings from nationally recognized statistical rating organizations (NRSRO) to classify all other debt securities. NAIC ratings are based on a model that considers the book price of our securities when assessing the probability of future losses in assigning a credit rating. As a result, NAIC ratings can vary from credit ratings issued by NRSROs. Management believes NAIC ratings more accurately reflect our risk profile when determining the asset allocation between Group I and Group II securities.Unrealized Gains and LossesDuring the first quarter 2023, our total net unrealized losses on fixed-maturity securities decreased $0.6 billion, resulting from declining interest rates during the period, compared to an increase in net unrealized losses of $1.4 billion in the first quarter of last year when interest rates were rising. The valuation changes for both periods were primarily in our U.S. government and corporate debt portfolios, with our commercial mortgage-backed securities also declining in value during the first quarter last year. As of March 31, 2023, our fixed-maturity portfolio had total after-tax net unrealized losses, which are recorded as part of accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) on the consolidated balance sheets, of $2.2 billion, compared to $1.4 billion and $2.8 billion at March 31, 2022 and December 31, 2022, respectively. See Note 2 – Investments for a further break-out of our gross unrealized gains (losses).
The following table provides the balance and activity for both the gross and net holding period gains (losses) for the three months ended March 31, 2023:
Equity securities include common equities and nonredeemable preferred stocks.
Changes in holding period gains (losses), similar to unrealized gains (losses) in our fixed-maturity portfolio, are the result of changes in market performance as well as sales of securities based on various portfolio management decisions.
The fixed-income portfolio is managed internally and includes fixed-maturity securities, short-term investments, and nonredeemable preferred stocks. Following are the primary exposures for our fixed-income portfolio.Interest Rate Risk  Our duration of 3.0 years at March 31, 2023, 3.1 years at March 31, 2022, and 2.9 years at December 31, 2022 fell within our acceptable range of 1.5 to 5 years. The duration distribution of our fixed-income portfolio, excluding short-term investments, represented by the interest rate sensitivity of the comparable benchmark U.S. Treasury Notes, was:
Credit Risk This exposure is managed by maintaining an A+ minimum average portfolio credit quality rating, as defined by NRSROs. At both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, our credit quality rating was AA  and at March 31, 2022 it was AA-. The credit quality distribution of the fixed-income portfolio was:
1 The ratings in the table above are assigned by NRSROs.
Concentration Risk We did not have any investments in a single issuer, either overall or in the context of individual asset classes and sectors, that exceeded our thresholds during the first quarter 2023.Prepayment and Extension Risk We did not experience significant adverse prepayment or extension of principal relative to our cash flow expectations in the portfolio during the first quarter 2023.Liquidity Risk Our overall portfolio remains very liquid and we believe that it is sufficient to meet expected near-term liquidity requirements. The short-to-intermediate duration of our portfolio provides a source of liquidity, as we expect approximately $4.3 billion, or 19%, of principal repayment from our fixed-income portfolio, excluding U.S. Treasury Notes and short-term investments, during the remainder of 2023. Cash from interest and dividend payments and our short-term portfolio provide additional sources of recurring liquidity.The duration of our U.S. government obligations, which are included in the fixed-income portfolio, was comprised of the following at March 31, 2023:
Included in the fixed-income portfolio are asset-backed securities, which were comprised of the following at the balance sheet dates listed:
1 The credit quality ratings in the table above are assigned by NRSROs. Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities (RMBS) The following table details the credit quality rating and fair value of our RMBS, along with the loan classification and a comparison of the fair value at March 31, 2023, to our original investment value (adjusted for returns of principal, amortization, and write-downs):
1 The credit quality ratings are assigned by NRSROs; when we assigned the NAIC ratings for our RMBS, 100% of our non-investment-grade securities were rated investment grade and reported as Group II securities.2 The securities in this category are insured by a Government Sponsored Entity (GSE) and/or collateralized by mortgage loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) or the U.S.Department of Veteran Affairs (VA). .In the residential mortgage-backed sector, our portfolio consists of deals that are backed by high-credit quality borrowers or have strong structural protections through underlying loan collateralization. During the first quarter 2023, the portfolio decreased as a result of maturities on securities and we did not have any purchase or sales activity.Commercial Mortgage-Backed Securities (CMBS) The following table details the credit quality rating and fair value of our CMBS, along with a comparison of the fair value at March 31, 2023, to our original investment value (adjusted for returns of principal, amortization, and write-downs):
1 The credit quality ratings are assigned by NRSROs; when we assigned the NAIC ratings for our CMBS, 30% of our non-investment-grade securities were rated investment grade and reported as Group II securities, with the remainder classified as Group I.The CMBS portfolio experienced heightened volatility in the first quarter 2023, as commercial real estate has been a focal point of investor concern. In addition to concerns around employees returning to the office, stress in the regional banking sector could translate into less availability of financing for this asset class. New issuance has remained slow in the single-asset single-borrower (SASB) market and liquidity has continued to be challenged. Given continued uncertainty about the future trajectory of the economy and its impact on real estate, we reduced certain positions, during the quarter, that we believed would be sensitive to potential future economic weakness. As of the end of the first quarter 2023, we had no delinquencies in our CMBS portfolio.With renewed focus on the commercial real estate sector, the following table shows the composition of our CMBS portfolio by maturity year and sector:
1The floating-rate securities were extended to their full maturity and fixed-rate securities are shown to their anticipated repayment date (if applicable) or otherwise, their maturity date. We show the average loan to value (LTV) of each maturity year when the loans were originated. The LTV ratio that management uses, which is commonly expressed as a percentage, compares the size of the entire mortgage loan to the appraised value of the underlying property collateralizing the loan at issuance. A LTV ratio less than 100% indicates excess collateral value over the loan amount. LTV ratios greater than 100% indicate that the loan amount exceeds the collateral value. We believe this ratio provides a conservative view of our actual risk of loss, as this number displays the entire mortgage LTV, while our ownership is only a portion of the structure of the mortgage loan-backed security. For many of the mortgage loans in our portfolio, our exposure is in a more senior part of the structure, which means that the LTV on our actual exposure is even lower than the ratios presented. In addition to the LTV ratio, we also examine the credit of our CMBS portfolio by reviewing the debt service coverage ratio (DSCR) of the securities. The DSCR ratio compares the underlying property's annual net operating income to its annual debt service payments. DSCR ratios less than 1.0 times indicate that property operations do not generate enough income over the debt service payments, while a DSCR ratio greater than 1.0 times indicates that there is an excess of operating income over the debt service payments. A number above 1.0 generally indicates that there would not be an incentive for the borrower to default in light of the borrower's excess income. The DSCR calculation reported in the table is calculated based on the most currently available net operating income and mortgage payments for the borrower, which, for most securities, is full year 2022 data.Other Asset-Backed Securities (OABS) The following table details the credit quality rating and fair value of our OABS, along with a comparison of the fair value at March 31, 2023, to our original investment value (adjusted for returns of principal, amortization, and write-downs):
During the first quarter 2023, we selectively added to our automobile, equipment, and whole business securitization as we viewed spreads, and potential returns, across this sector to be attractive. Our automobile and equipment additions were mainly through new issue purchases, primarily focusing on higher credit tranche securities in the capital structure.
The following table details the credit quality rating of our municipal securities at March 31, 2023, without the benefit of credit or bond insurance:
Included in revenue bonds were $502.3 million of single-family housing revenue bonds issued by state housing finance agencies, of which $311.0 million were supported by individual mortgages held by the state housing finance agencies and $191.3 million were supported by mortgage-backed securities.
Of the programs supported by mortgage-backed securities, 84% were collateralized by Ginnie Mae mortgages, which are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government; the remaining 16% were collateralized by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgages. Of the programs supported by individual mortgages held by the state housing finance agencies, the overall credit quality rating was AA+. Most of these mortgages were supported by the Federal Housing Administration, the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, or private mortgage insurance providers.Credit spreads of both tax-exempt and taxable municipal bonds tightened during the first quarter 2023. Our allocation to this sector declined modestly during the quarter.
The following table details the credit quality rating of our corporate debt securities at March 31, 2023:
The size of our corporate debt portfolio increased to $10.7 billion at March 31, 2023 from $9.4 billion at December 31, 2022 as we increased our allocation to the investment-grade corporate sector. At the same time, we continued to reduce our exposure to high-yield securities given a less certain macro environment and less attractive risk/reward profile of these securities. At March 31, 2023, our corporate debt securities made up approximately 20% of the fixed-income portfolio, compared to approximately 19% at December 31, 2022. We slightly lengthened the maturity profile of the corporate debt portfolio during the first quarter 2023. The duration of the corporate portfolio was 3.0 years at March 31, 2023, compared to 2.8 years at December 31, 2022, as our purchases focused on securities with somewhat longer maturities which provided attractive risk reward profiles.
The table below shows the exposure break-down by sector and rating at March 31, 2023:
The majority of our preferred securities have fixed-rate dividends until a call date and then, if not called, generally convert to floating-rate dividends. The interest rate duration of our preferred securities is calculated to reflect the call, floor, and floating-rate features. Although a preferred security will remain outstanding if not called, its interest rate duration will reflect the variable nature of the dividend. Our non-investment-grade preferred stocks were all with issuers that maintain investment-grade senior debt ratings.We also face the risk that dividend payments on our preferred stock holdings could be deferred for one or more periods or skipped entirely. During the quarter, we had exposure to one institution that was put into receivership by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in March 2023. The effect of this action, along with broader weakness in securities issued by financial institutions, drove the majority of the decline in the portfolio’s value from $1.4 billion at December 31, 2022 to $1.3 billion at March 31, 2023. Additionally, we had an industrial position that was called during the quarter. Approximately 82% of our preferred stock securities pay dividends that have tax preferential characteristics, while the balance pay dividends that are fully taxable.
Common equities, as reported on the balance sheets, were comprised of the following:
1The other risk investments consist of limited partnership interests.The majority of our common stock portfolio consists of individual holdings selected based on their contribution to the correlation with the Russell 1000 Index. We held 787 out of 1,007, or 78%, of the common stocks comprising the index at March 31, 2023, which made up 95% of the total market capitalization of the index. At March 31, 2023 and 2022, and December 31, 2022, the year-to-date total return, based on GAAP income, was within our targeted tracking error, which is +/- 50 basis points.During 2022, we sold common equity securities, which were in a realized gain position, as part of our plan to incrementally reduce risk in the portfolio in response to the potential of a more difficult economic environment over the near term.