
The Company is a global leader in motion and control technologies.  For more than a century, the Company has engineered the success of its customers in a wide range of diversified industrial and aerospace markets.By aligning around our purpose, Enabling Engineering Breakthroughs that Lead to a Better Tomorrow, Parker is better positioned for the challenges and opportunities of tomorrow.The Win Strategy 3.0 is Parker's business system that defines the goals and initiatives that drive growth, transformation and success.  It works with our purpose, which is a foundational element of The Win Strategy, to engage team members and create responsible and sustainable growth.  Our shared values shape our culture and our interactions with stakeholders and the communities in which we operate and live.We believe many opportunities for profitable growth are available.  The Company intends to focus primarily on business opportunities in the areas of energy, water, food, environment, defense, life sciences, infrastructure and transportation.  We believe we can meet our strategic objectives by:•Serving the customer and continuously enhancing its experience with the Company;•Successfully executing The Win Strategy initiatives relating to engaged people, premier customer experience, profitable growth and financial performance;•Maintaining a decentralized division and sales company structure;•Fostering a safety-first and entrepreneurial culture;•Engineering innovative systems and products to provide superior customer value through improved service, efficiency and productivity;•Delivering products, systems and services that have demonstrable savings to customers and are priced by the value they deliver;•Enabling a sustainable future by providing innovative technology solutions that offer a positive, global environmental impact and operating responsibly by reducing our energy use and emissions;•Acquiring strategic businesses;•Organizing around targeted regions, technologies and markets; •Driving efficiency by implementing lean enterprise principles; and •Creating a culture of empowerment through our values, inclusion and diversity, accountability and teamwork.Our order rates provide a near-term perspective of the Company’s outlook particularly when viewed in the context of prior and future order rates.  The Company publishes its order rates on a quarterly basis.  The lead time between the time an order is received and revenue is realized generally ranges from one day to 12 weeks for mobile and industrial orders and from one day to 18 months for aerospace orders.Recent events impacting our business include the Russia-Ukraine war and novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic and their residual effects, including the inflationary cost environment as well as disruption within the global supply chain, labor markets and aerospace industry.  We are actively managing the impact of these events on our business.Despite disruption within the aerospace industry, commercial aerospace demand is recovering.  We are managing the challenging supply chain environment through our "local for local" manufacturing strategy, ongoing supplier management process, and broadened supply base. We are also managing the impact of the inflationary cost environment through a variety of cost and pricing measures, including continuous improvement and lean initiatives. Additionally, we are strategically managing our workforce and discretionary spending.  At the same time, we are appropriately addressing the ongoing needs of our business so that we may continue to serve our customers.Over the long term, the extent to which our business and results of operations will be impacted by the economic and political uncertainty resulting from the Russia-Ukraine war and the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that remain uncertain.  These developments include the duration of the supply chain and labor market constraints, the severity and duration of the Russia-Ukraine war and related sanctions, distribution and continuing effectiveness of vaccines, the severity and spread of COVID-19 and its variants and mitigating actions by government authorities.  Additionally, as these events and other global economic factors have led to an increased inflationary environment, we continue to monitor and manage the effects of inflation with the goal of minimizing its impact on our business, operations, and financial results.As previously announced, on March 14, 2022, we detected that an unauthorized party gained access to our systems.  After securing our network and concluding our investigation, we found that the data exfiltrated during the incident included personal information of our team members.  We have notified individuals whose personal information was involved and offered them credit monitoring services.  We have also provided notification regarding the incident to the appropriate regulatory authorities. A consolidated class action lawsuit has been filed in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Ohio against the Company over the incident.  The parties have reached a settlement in principle in the lawsuit, which the district court preliminarily approved on March 14, 2023.  Based on our ongoing assessments, the incident has not had a significant financial or operational impact and has not had a material impact on our business, operations or financial results.The discussion below is structured to separately discuss the Consolidated Statement of Income, Business Segment Information, and Liquidity and Capital Resources.  As used in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms "Company", "Parker", "we" or "us" refer to Parker-Hannifin Corporation and its subsidiaries.
Net sales increased for the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 when compared to the prior-year periods due to higher sales in both the Aerospace Systems and Diversified Industrial Segments. Acquisitions completed within the last 12 months increased sales by approximately $624 million and $1,396 million during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  In the current-year quarter, the effect of currency rate changes decreased net sales by approximately $97 million, of which substantially all was attributable to the Diversified Industrial International businesses.  During the first nine months of fiscal 2023, the effect of currency rate changes decreased net sales by approximately $454 million, of which approximately $443 million was attributable to the Diversified Industrial International businesses, while the remainder was split evenly between the Diversified Industrial North American businesses and the Aerospace Systems Segment. Divestitures completed within the last 12 months decreased sales by approximately $22 million and $43 million, during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.Gross profit margin (calculated as net sales minus cost of sales, divided by net sales) increased slightly in the current-year quarter and decreased slightly in first nine months of fiscal 2023.  During the current year-quarter, an increase in the Diversified Industrial Segment and Aerospace margins was partially offset by the amortization of step-up in inventory to fair value of $112 million within the Aerospace Systems Segment.  During the first nine months of fiscal 2023, the decrease in margin was primarily driven by the amortization of step-up in inventory to fair value of $130 million within the Aerospace Systems Segment.  This decrease was partially offset by higher margins in the Diversified Industrial Segment.  Margins during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 benefited from higher volume, price increases and cost containment initiatives, partially offset by higher material and operating costs resulting from the ongoing inflationary environment.Cost of sales also included business realignment and acquisition integration charges of $9 million and $1 million for the current-year and prior-year quarter, respectively, and $18 million and $2 million for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 and 2022, respectively.Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") increased during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 primarily due to higher amortization expense, research and development expense, and information technology charges as well as increased general and administrative charges associated with the acquisition (the "Acquisition") of Meggitt plc ("Meggitt").  During the first nine months of fiscal 2023, SG&A also increased due to $112 million of acquisition-related transaction costs compared to $34 million in the same prior-year period.SG&A included business realignment and acquisition integration charges of $31 million and $3 million for the current-year and prior-year quarter, respectively, and $76 million and $10 million for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 and 2022, respectively. Interest expense for the current-year quarter and the first nine months of fiscal 2023 increased due to both higher average debt outstanding and higher interest rates when compared to the prior-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2022.
included the following:
Foreign currency transaction (gain) loss primarily relates to the impact of exchange rates on cash, forward contracts, certain cross-currency swap contracts and intercompany transactions.  During the first nine months of fiscal 2023, it also includes foreign currency transaction loss associated with completing the Acquisition.Loss (gain) on disposal of assets and divestitures for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 includes a gain on the sale of the aircraft wheel and brake business within the Aerospace Systems Segment of $374 million.  Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.Acquisition-related financing fees relate to the bridge credit agreement (the "Bridge Credit Agreement") associated with the Acquisition.  Refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.Loss on deal-contingent forward contracts includes a loss on the deal-contingent forward contracts related to the Acquisition.  Refer to Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.Effective tax rate for the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 was higher than the comparable prior-year periods due to a decrease in discrete tax benefits as well as an increase in taxes on current-year earnings.  The fiscal 2023 effective tax rate is expected to be approximately 23.0 percent.
The Diversified Industrial Segment operations experienced the following percentage changes in net sales in the current-year periods versus the comparable prior-year periods:
1This table reconciles the percentage changes in net sales of the Diversified Industrial Segment reported in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP") to percentage changes in net sales adjusted to remove the effects of acquisitions made within the last 12 months as well as currency exchange rates (a non-GAAP measure).  The effects of acquisitions and currency exchange rates are removed to allow investors and the Company to meaningfully evaluate the percentage changes in net sales on a comparable basis from period to period.
Diversified Industrial North America - Sales increased 16.3 percent and 17.8 percent during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  The effect of acquisitions increased sales by approximately $92 million and $205 million during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  Currency exchange rates did not materially impact sales in the current-year quarter or first nine months of fiscal 2023. Excluding the effects of acquisitions and changes in the currency exchange rates, sales in the Diversified Industrial North American businesses increased 11.7 percent in the current-year quarter and 14.2 percent in the first nine months of fiscal 2023 when compared to prior-year levels primarily due to higher demand from distributors and end users across most markets, including farm and agriculture, cars and light trucks, construction equipment, lawn and turf, heavy-duty truck, semiconductors, metal fabrication, industrial machinery and oil and gas markets, partially offset by lower end-user demand in the life sciences market. Diversified Industrial International - Sales increased 5.9 percent and 1.5 percent from the prior-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2022, respectively.  The effect of acquisitions increased sales by approximately $38 million and $74 million during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  Currency exchange rates decreased sales by approximately $97 million and $443 million in the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  Excluding the effects of acquisitions and changes in the currency exchange rates, Diversified Industrial International sales increased 10.0 percent and 10.2 percent in the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively, from prior-year levels.  Europe accounted for approximately 65 percent of the increase in sales during the current-year quarter, while the Asia Pacific region and Latin America comprised approximately 30 percent and five percent of the increase in sales, respectively. During the first nine months of fiscal 2023, Europe accounted for approximately 60 percent of the increase in sales, while the Asia Pacific region and Latin America comprised approximately 35 percent and five percent of the increase in sales, respectively.Within Europe, sales in the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 increased primarily due to higher demand from distributors and end users across most markets, including the construction equipment, heavy-duty truck, cars and light trucks, farm and agriculture, oil and gas, metal fabrication, material handling, machine tool, and mining markets. In the current-year quarter, we experienced higher end-user demand in the power generation market, partially offset by lower end-user demand in the rubber and plastics market.  In the first nine months of fiscal 2023, we also experienced higher end-user demand in the industrial machinery market, partially offset by lower end-user demand in the power generation market.  Within the Asia Pacific region, sales in the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 increased primarily due to an increase in demand from distributors and end users across the construction equipment, cars and light trucks, heavy-duty truck, marine, mining, telecommunications, engines, and oil and gas markets, partially offset by lower end-user demand in the industrial machinery and refrigeration markets.  Additionally, during the current-year quarter, we experienced lower end-user demand in the semiconductor market.  In the first nine months of fiscal 2023, we experienced lower end-user demand in the life sciences market, partially offset by higher end-user demand in the semiconductor market.   Within Latin America, sales in the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 increased primarily due to higher demand from distributors and end users in the cars and light trucks, farm and agriculture, metal fabrication, oil and gas, railroad, rubber and plastics and engine markets, partially offset by lower end-user demand in the industrial machinery, construction equipment, and material handling markets.  In the first nine months of fiscal 2023, we also experienced higher end-user demand in the in heavy-duty truck market.
Diversified Industrial North America - Operating margins increased in both the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 primarily due to benefits from increased volume, cost control initiatives and price increases, partially offset by higher material and operating costs resulting from the inflationary environment as well as unfavorable product mix.Diversified Industrial International - Operating margins during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 increased from the same prior-year periods primarily due to benefits from cost control initiatives and price increases, partially offset by higher material and operating costs resulting from the inflationary environment as well as unfavorable product mix.
The following business realignment and acquisition integration charges are included in Diversified Industrial North American and Diversified Industrial International operating income:
The business realignment charges primarily consist of severance costs related to actions taken under the Company's simplification initiative aimed at reducing organizational and process complexity, as well as plant closures.  Acquisition integration charges in the current-year relate to the acquisition of Meggitt, and prior-year charges relate to the fiscal 2020 acquisition of LORD Corporation ("Lord").  Business realignment and acquisition integration charges within the Diversified Industrial International businesses were primarily incurred in Europe.We anticipate that cost savings realized from the workforce reduction measures taken in the first nine months of fiscal 2023 will not materially impact operating income in fiscal 2023 or 2024.  We expect to continue to take actions necessary to integrate acquisitions and structure appropriately the operations of the Diversified Industrial Segment.  We currently anticipate incurring approximately $18 million of additional business realignment and acquisition integration charges in the remainder of fiscal 2023.  However, continually changing business conditions could impact the ultimate costs we incur.During the prior-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2022, we also incurred $6 million of expense within the Diversified Industrial International businesses as a result of our exit of business operations in Russia.  These charges primarily consisted of write-downs of inventory and other working capital items.
Diversified Industrial Segment backlog as of March 31, 2023 increased from the prior-year quarter primarily due to the addition of Meggitt backlog in the first nine months of fiscal 2023 as well as orders exceeding shipments in the North American businesses. This increase was partially offset by shipments exceeding orders in the International businesses.  Excluding the addition of Meggitt backlog, the Asia Pacific region, Europe and Latin America accounted for approximately 70 percent, 20 percent and 10 percent of the change within the International businesses, respectively.As of March 31, 2023, Diversified Industrial Segment backlog increased compared to the June 30, 2022 amount of $4.5 billion due to the addition of Meggitt backlog during the first nine months of fiscal 2023, partially offset by shipments exceeding orders in both the North American and International businesses. Within the International businesses, the decrease was primarily due to shipments exceeding orders in the Asia Pacific region and Latin America, partially offset by orders exceeding shipments in Europe.Backlog consists of written firm orders from a customer to deliver products and, in the case of blanket purchase orders, only includes the portion of the order for which a schedule or release date has been agreed to with the customer.  The dollar value of backlog is equal to the amount that is expected to be billed to the customer and reported as a sale.
Aerospace Systems Segment sales for the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 increased compared to the same prior-year periods primarily due to the addition of Meggitt sales of $494 million and $1,117 million during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  Sales also increased compared to the same prior-year periods due to higher volume in the commercial original equipment manufacturers ("OEM") and aftermarket businesses, while volume in the military OEM and aftermarket businesses remained flat.  The increase in sales was partially offset by divestitures during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023.
Aerospace Systems Segment operating margin decreased during the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 primarily due to acquisition-related expenses, including higher estimated amortization and depreciation expense associated with the preliminary fair value estimates of intangible assets, plant and equipment, and inventory, as well as acquisition integration charges. Additionally, higher commercial OEM volume, an increase in contract loss reserves related to certain commercial OEM programs, challenges created by the disruption within the supply chain and labor markets and higher engineering development expenses also contributed to the lower operating margin.  These factors were partially offset by higher commercial aftermarket volume and cost containment initiatives.
Within the Aerospace Systems Segment, we incurred acquisition integration and business realignment charges of $26 million and $72 million in the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023, respectively.  We expect to incur approximately $8 million of additional business realignment and acquisition integration charges in the remainder of fiscal 2023.  However, continually changing business conditions could impact the ultimate costs we incur.During the prior-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2022, we also incurred $7 million of expense within the Aerospace Systems Segment as a result of our exit of business operations in Russia.  These charges primarily consisted of write-downs of inventory and other working capital items.
Aerospace Systems Segment backlog as of March 31, 2023 increased from both the prior-year quarter and June 30, 2022 amount of $3.3 billion primarily due to the addition of the Meggitt backlog in the first nine months of fiscal 2023.  Backlog also increased from the prior-year quarter and June 30, 2022 amount due to orders exceeding shipments within the commercial OEM and aftermarket businesses and the military OEM and aftermarket businesses.Backlog consists of written firm orders from a customer to deliver products and, in the case of blanket purchase orders, only includes the portion of the order for which a schedule or release date has been agreed to with the customer.  The dollar value of backlog is equal to the amount that is expected to be billed to the customer and reported as a sale.
Corporate general and administrative expenses decreased in both the current-year quarter and first nine months of fiscal 2023 primarily due to lower net expense from the Company's deferred compensation plan and related investments, partially offset by increases in professional service fees.  An increase in incentive compensation and other discretionary spending partially offset the decrease in expense during the first nine months of fiscal 2023.
(in Business Segments) included the following:
Foreign currency transaction (gain) loss primarily relates to the impact of exchange rates on cash, forward contracts, certain cross currency swap contracts and intercompany transactions.  During the first nine months of fiscal 2023, it also includes foreign currency transaction loss associated with completing the Acquisition.Acquisition-related expenses include Bridge Credit Agreement financing fees and transaction costs related to the Acquisition.  Refer to Notes 4 and 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the acquisition-related transaction costs and Bridge Credit Agreement, respectively.Loss on deal-contingent forward contracts includes a loss on the deal-contingent forward contracts related to the Acquisition.  Refer to Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.Loss (gain) on disposal of assets and divestitures for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 includes a gain on the sale of the aircraft wheel and brake business within the Aerospace Systems Segment of approximately $374 million.  Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
We believe that we are great generators and deployers of cash.  We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operations and meet our strategic capital deployment objectives, which include the following:•Continuing our record annual dividend increases•Investing in organic growth and productivity•Strategic acquisitions that strengthen our portfolio•Offset share dilution through 10b5-1 share repurchase program
A summary of cash flows follows:
Cash flows from operating activities for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 were $1,795 million compared to $1,548 million for the first nine months of fiscal 2022.  This increase of $246 million was primarily related to an increase in cash provided by accounts receivable, inventories and accounts payable, trade. We continue to focus on managing inventory and other working capital requirements.  Cash flows from operating activities for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 were negatively impacted by acquisition transaction expenses.•Days sales outstanding relating to trade accounts receivable was 52 days at March 31, 2023, 51 days at June 30, 2022 and 53 days at March 31, 2022.•Days supply of inventory on hand was 90 days at March 31, 2023, 77 days at June 30, 2022 and 81 days at March 31, 2022.Cash flows from investing activities for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 and 2022 were impacted by the following factors:•Payment for the Acquisition, net of cash acquired, of $7.1 billion in fiscal 2023.•Payments to settle the deal-contingent forward contracts of $1.4 billion in fiscal 2023.•Net proceeds from the sale of the aircraft wheel and brake business of approximately $443 million in fiscal 2023.•Cash collateral received of $250 million in fiscal 2023 per the credit support annex attached to the deal-contingent forward contracts.Cash flows from financing activities for the first nine months of fiscal 2023 and 2022 were impacted by the following factors:•Proceeds of $2 billion from borrowings under the term loan facility ("Term Loan Facility") in fiscal 2023. Subsequently in fiscal 2023, we made payments totaling $750 million towards the Term Loan Facility. •Payments to retire $300 million aggregate principal amount of private placement notes assumed in the Acquisition in fiscal 2023.•Payments related to maturity of $300 million aggregate principal amount of medium term notes in fiscal 2023.•Repurchases of 0.5 million common shares for $150 million during fiscal 2023 compared to repurchases of 1.1 million common shares for $330 million during fiscal 2022.•Net commercial paper borrowings of $258 million in fiscal 2023 compared to net commercial paper borrowings of $1,621 million in fiscal 2022.
We are actively monitoring our liquidity position and remain focused on managing our inventory and other working capital requirements.  We are continuing to target two percent of sales for capital expenditures and are prioritizing those related to safety and strategic investments.  We believe that cash generated from operations and our commercial paper program will satisfy our operating needs for the foreseeable future.
We declared a quarterly dividend of $1.33 per share on January 26, 2023, which was paid on March 3, 2023.  Dividends have been paid for 291 consecutive quarters.  Additionally, we declared a quarterly dividend of $1.48 per share on April 27, 2023, payable on June 2, 2023, increasing our annual dividend per share paid to shareholders for 67 consecutive fiscal years.
The Company has a program to repurchase its common shares.  On October 22, 2014, the Board of Directors of the Company approved an increase in the overall number of shares authorized to repurchase under the program so that, beginning on such date, the aggregate number of shares authorized for repurchase was 35 million.  There is no limitation on the number of shares that can be repurchased in a year.  Repurchases may be funded primarily from operating cash flows and commercial paper borrowings and the shares are initially held as treasury shares. Refer to Note 6 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of share repurchases.
Cash, comprised of cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities and other investments, includes $500 million and $465 million held by the Company's foreign subsidiaries at March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022, respectively.  The Company does not permanently reinvest certain foreign earnings.  The distribution of these earnings could result in non-federal U.S. or foreign taxes.  All other undistributed foreign earnings remain permanently reinvested.We are currently authorized to sell up to $3.0 billion of short-term commercial paper notes.  As of March 31, 2023, $1.7 billion of commercial paper notes were outstanding, and the largest amount of commercial paper notes outstanding during the current-year quarter was $1.9 billion.The Company has a line of credit totaling $3.0 billion through a multi-currency revolving credit agreement with a group of banks, of which $1.3 billion was available as of March 31, 2023.  Advances from the credit agreement can be used for general corporate purposes, including acquisitions, and for the refinancing of existing indebtedness.  The credit agreement supports our commercial paper program, and issuances of commercial paper reduce the amount of credit available under the agreement.  The credit agreement expires in September 2024; however, the Company has the right to request a one-year extension of the expiration date on an annual basis, which may result in changes to the current terms and conditions of the credit agreement.  The credit agreement requires the payment of an annual facility fee, the amount of which is dependent upon the Company’s credit ratings.  Although a lowering of the Company’s credit ratings would increase the cost of future debt, it would not limit the Company’s ability to use the credit agreement, nor would it accelerate the repayment of any outstanding borrowings.We primarily utilize unsecured medium-term notes and senior notes to meet our financing needs and we expect to continue to borrow funds at reasonable rates over the long term.  Refer to the Cash flows from financing activities section above and Notes 4 and 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.On May 4, 2023, the Company called $600 million aggregate principal amount of private placement notes assumed in the Acquisition and will redeem them at par plus accrued and unpaid interest in June 2023.The Company’s credit agreement and indentures governing certain debt securities contain various covenants, the violation of which would limit or preclude the use of the credit agreements for future borrowings, or might accelerate the maturity of the related outstanding borrowings covered by the indentures.  Based on the Company’s rating level at March 31, 2023, the most restrictive financial covenant provides that the ratio of debt to debt-shareholders' equity cannot exceed 0.65 to 1.0.  At March 31, 2023, the Company's debt to debt-shareholders' equity ratio was 0.58 to 1.0.  We are in compliance and expect to remain in compliance with all covenants set forth in the credit agreement and indentures.Our goal is to maintain an investment-grade credit profile.  The rating agencies periodically update our credit ratings as events occur.  At March 31, 2023, the long-term credit ratings assigned to the Company's senior debt securities by the credit rating agencies engaged by the Company were as follows:
We continue to identify opportunities to improve our liquidity and working capital efficiency, which includes the extension of payment terms with our suppliers. We currently have supply chain financing ("SCF") programs with financial intermediaries, which provides certain suppliers the option to be paid by the financial intermediaries earlier than the due date on the applicable invoice. We are not a party to the agreements between the participating financial intermediaries and the suppliers in connection with the program. The range of payment terms we negotiate with our suppliers is consistent, irrespective of whether a supplier participates in the programs. We do not reimburse suppliers for any costs they incur for participation in the programs and their participation is completely voluntary. Amounts due to our suppliers that elected to participate in the SCF programs are included in accounts payable on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.  Accounts payable included approximately $86 million and $46 million payable to suppliers who have elected to participate in the SCF programs as of March 31, 2023 and June 30, 2022, respectively.  The amounts settled through the SCF programs and paid to the participating financial intermediaries totaled $184 million during the first nine months of fiscal 2023.  The increase in the amount outstanding in the programs from the June 30, 2022 balance is due to the addition of Meggitt's SCF program.  We account for payments made under the programs in the same manner as our other accounts payable, which is a reduction to our cash flows from operations. We do not believe that changes in the availability of supply chain financing will have a significant impact on our liquidity.
Upon announcing the Acquisition on August 2, 2021, the Company entered into the Bridge Credit Agreement where lenders committed to provide senior, unsecured financing in the aggregate principal amount of £6.5 billion.  In July 2022, after consideration of an escrow balance designated for the Acquisition and funds available under the $2.0 billion Term Loan Facility, we reduced the aggregate committed principal amount of the Bridge Credit Agreement to zero, and the Bridge Credit Agreement was terminated.During September 2022, the Company fully drew against the $2.0 billion Term Loan Facility, which will mature in its entirety in September 2025, to finance a portion of the Acquisition. During the nine months ended March 31, 2023, we made principal payments totaling $750 million related to the Term Loan Facility. Refer to Note 14 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.On September 12, 2022, we completed the acquisition of all of the outstanding ordinary shares of Meggitt for 800 pence per share, resulting in an aggregate cash purchase price of $7.2 billion, including the assumption of debt.  We funded the purchase using cash and net proceeds from the issuance of senior notes and commercial paper and the Term Loan Facility, which were accumulated in an escrow account designated for the Acquisition.  Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.Upon closing the Acquisition, we settled the deal-contingent forward contracts entered into during October 2021 to mitigate the risk of appreciation in the GBP-denominated purchase price.  These deal-contingent forward contracts had an aggregate notional amount of £6.4 billion.  Refer to the Cash Flows section above and Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.On April 11, 2022, the European Commission cleared the Acquisition, conditional on full compliance with commitments offered by Parker, including a commitment to divest its aircraft wheel and brake business within the Aerospace Systems Segment.  In accordance with these commitments, we sold the aircraft wheel and brake business in September 2022 for proceeds of $443 million. Refer to Note 4 to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Forward-looking statements contained in this and other written and oral reports are made based on known events and circumstances at the time of release, and as such, are subject in the future to unforeseen uncertainties and risks. Often but not always, these statements may be identified from the use of forward-looking terminology such as “anticipates,” “believes,” “may,” “should,” “could,” “expects,” “targets,” “is likely,” “will,” or the negative of these terms and similar expressions, and include all statements regarding future performance, earnings projections, events or developments.  Neither Parker nor any of its respective associates or directors, officers or advisers, provides any representation, assurance or guarantee that the occurrence of the events expressed or implied in any forward-looking statements will actually occur. Parker cautions readers not to place undue reliance on these statements. It is possible that the future performance and earnings projections of the company, including its individual segments, may differ materially from past performance or current expectations.  A change in the economic conditions in individual markets may have a particularly volatile effect on segment performance.Among other factors which may affect future performance are:•changes in business relationships with and purchases by or from major customers, suppliers or distributors, including delays or cancellations in shipments;•disputes regarding contract terms or significant changes in financial condition, changes in contract cost and revenue estimates for new development programs and changes in product mix;•the impact of the global outbreak of COVID-19 and governmental and other actions taken in response;•ability to identify acceptable strategic acquisition targets; uncertainties surrounding timing, successful completion or integration of acquisitions and similar transactions, including the integration of Meggitt, Lord and Exotic Metals Forming Company LLC ("Exotic"); and our ability to effectively manage expanded operations from the acquisitions of Meggitt, Lord and Exotic;•the ability to successfully divest businesses planned for divestiture and realize the anticipated benefits of such divestitures;•the determination to undertake business realignment activities and the expected costs thereof and, if undertaken, the ability to complete such activities and realize the anticipated cost savings from such activities;•ability to implement successfully capital allocation initiatives, including timing, price and execution of share repurchases;•availability, limitations or cost increases of raw materials, component products and/or commodities that cannot be recovered in product pricing;•ability to manage costs related to insurance and employee retirement and health care benefits;•legal and regulatory developments and changes;•additional liabilities relating to changes in tax rates or exposure to additional income tax liabilities;•ability to enter into, own, renew, protect and maintain intellectual property and know-how;•leverage and future debt service obligations;•potential impairment of goodwill;•compliance costs associated with environmental laws and regulations;•potential labor disruptions or shortages;•uncertainties surrounding the ultimate resolution of outstanding legal proceedings, including the outcome of any appeals;•global competitive market conditions, including U.S. trade policies and resulting effects on sales and pricing;•global economic factors, including manufacturing activity, air travel trends, currency exchange rates, difficulties entering new markets and general economic conditions such as inflation, deflation, interest rates, credit availability and changes in consumer habits and preferences;•local and global political and economic conditions, including the Russia-Ukraine war and its residual effects;•inability to obtain, or meet conditions imposed for, required governmental and regulatory approvals;•government actions and natural phenomena such as pandemics, floods, earthquakes, hurricanes or other natural phenomena that may be related to climate change;•increased cyber security threats and sophisticated computer crime; and•success of business and operating initiatives.The Company makes these statements as of the date of the filing of its Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2023, and undertakes no obligation to update them unless otherwise required by law.