
We are a leading international tobacco company working to deliver a smoke-free future and to evolve our portfolio for the long term to include products outside of the tobacco and nicotine sector. Our current product portfolio primarily consists of cigarettes and smoke-free products. Since 2008, we have invested more than $10.5 billion to develop, scientifically substantiate and commercialize innovative smoke-free products for adults who would otherwise continue to smoke, with the goal of completely ending the sale of cigarettes. This investment includes the building of world-class scientific assessment capabilities, notably in the areas of pre-clinical systems toxicology, clinical and behavioral research, as well as post-market studies. In November 2022, we acquired Swedish Match AB ("Swedish Match") – a leader in oral nicotine delivery – creating a global smoke-free combination led by the companies’ IQOS and ZYN brands. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration ("FDA") has authorized versions of our IQOS Platform 1 devices and consumables, and Swedish Match's General snus, as Modified Risk Tobacco Products (MRTPs). We describe the MRTP orders in more detail in the "Business Environment" section of this Item 2. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A"). To further support the growth of our smoke-free business, reinforce consumer centricity, and increase the speed of innovation and deployment, in January 2023, we began managing our business in four geographical segments, down from six previously, in addition to its continuing Swedish Match and Wellness and Healthcare segments. The four geographical segments are as follows: Europe Region; South and Southeast Asia, Commonwealth of Independent States, Middle East and Africa Region ("SSEA, CIS & MEA"); East Asia, Australia, and PMI Duty Free Region ("EA, AU & PMI DF"); and Americas Region. Our cigarettes are sold in approximately 175 markets, and in many of these markets they hold the number one or number two market share position.  We have a wide range of premium, mid-price and low-price brands.  Our portfolio comprises both international and local brands.  Smoke-free products ("SFPs") is the term we primarily use to refer to all of our products that are not combustible tobacco products, such as heat-not-burn, e-vapor, and oral nicotine. In addition, SFPs include wellness and healthcare products, as well as consumer accessories such as lighters and matches.In addition to the manufacture and sale of cigarettes, we are engaged in the development and commercialization of reduced-risk products ("RRPs").  RRPs is the term we use to refer to products that present, are likely to present, or have the potential to present less risk of harm to smokers who switch to these products versus continuing smoking.  We have a range of RRPs in various stages of development, scientific assessment and commercialization. Our RRPs are SFPs that contain and/or generate far lower quantities of harmful and potentially harmful constituents than found in cigarette smoke. IQOS is the leading brand in our SFPs portfolio.  As of March 31, 2023, our smoke-free products were available for sale in 78 markets. In 2021, we laid the foundation for our long-term growth ambitions beyond nicotine in wellness and healthcare, including the milestone acquisitions of Vectura Group plc and Fertin Pharma A/S, which provide essential capabilities for future product development. Now, through our Vectura Fertin Pharma business, with a strong foundation and significant expertise in life sciences, we aim to expand into wellness and healthcare areas. In 2022, we acquired Swedish Match AB, a market leader in oral nicotine delivery with a significant presence in the United States market.  The Swedish Match acquisition is a key milestone in PMI’s transformation to becoming a smoke-free company.  Swedish Match already has a leading nicotine pouch franchise in the U.S. under the ZYN brand name.  The Swedish Match product portfolio is complementary to our existing portfolio, permitting us to bring together a leading oral nicotine product with the leading heat-not-burn product.  By joining forces with Swedish Match, we expect to accelerate the achievement of our joint smoke-free ambitions, switching more adults who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes to better alternatives faster than either company could achieve separately. For further details, see Note 2. Acquisitions.In 2022, we also completed an agreement with Altria Group, Inc. to end our commercial relationship in the U.S. covering IQOS as of April 30, 2024. Thereafter, PMI will have the full rights to commercialize IQOS in the U.S.We use the term net revenues to refer to our operating revenues from the sale of our products, including shipping and handling charges billed to customers, net of sales and promotion incentives, and excise taxes.  Our net revenues and operating income are affected by various factors, including the volume of products we sell, the price of our products, changes in currency exchange rates and the mix of products we sell.  Mix is a term used to refer to the proportionate value of premium-price brands to mid-price or low-price brands in any given market (product mix).  Mix can also refer to the proportion of shipment volume in more profitable markets versus shipment volume in less profitable markets (geographic mix). Our cost of sales consists principally of: tobacco leaf, non-tobacco raw materials, labor and manufacturing costs; shipping and handling costs; and the cost of devices produced by third-party electronics manufacturing service providers.  Estimated costs associated with device warranty programs are generally provided for in cost of sales in the period the related revenues are recognized.Our marketing, administration and research costs include the costs of marketing and selling our products, other costs generally not related to the manufacture of our products (including general corporate expenses), and costs incurred to develop new products. The most significant components of our marketing, administration and research costs are marketing and sales expenses and general and administrative expenses.Philip Morris International Inc. is a legal entity separate and distinct from its direct and indirect subsidiaries.  Accordingly, our right, and thus the right of our creditors and stockholders, to participate in any distribution of the assets or earnings of any subsidiary is subject to the prior rights of creditors of such subsidiary, except to the extent that claims of our company itself as a creditor may be recognized.  As a holding company, our principal sources of funds, including funds to make payment on our debt securities, are from the receipt of dividends and repayment of debt from our subsidiaries.  Our principal wholly owned and majority-owned subsidiaries currently are not limited by long-term debt or other agreements in their ability to pay cash dividends or to make other distributions that are otherwise compliant with law.
The following executive summary provides the business update and significant highlights from the "Discussion and Analysis" that follows.
As of December 31, 2022, Philip Morris Holland Holdings B.V. (“PMHH”), a wholly owned subsidiary of PMI, had acquired 94.81% of the outstanding shares of Swedish Match. On February 17, 2023, PMHH obtained legal title under the Swedish Companies Act to the remaining issued and outstanding shares in Swedish Match, following the exercise of its right to compulsory redemption of all remaining shares.  For further details on the Swedish Match acquisition, see Note 2. Acquisitions.
Following the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East, PMI recorded a pre-tax charge of $80 million in the first quarter of 2023. The charge was recognized as a reduction of net revenues in the condensed consolidated statement of earnings.
In the first quarter of 2023, PMI initiated a project to fully outsource and restructure the manufacturing of e-vapor devices and consumables. As a result, PMI recorded pre-tax asset impairment and exit costs of $109 million.  For further details, see Note 17. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs.  While staying clearly focused on the heat-not-burn and nicotine pouch categories, which present the largest and most accretive growth opportunities, the company is adjusting its VEEV e-vapor portfolio and approach. PMI intends to focus on commercializing VEEV in select markets, with an emphasis on profitability given the known category challenges.
In Ukraine, our main priority remains the safety and security of our more than 1,300 employees and their families in the country. We continue select retail activities where safety allows, in order to provide product availability and service to adult consumers, and supplies the market from production centers outside Ukraine, as well as through a contract manufacturing arrangement.  Production at our factory in Kharkiv remains suspended. As of March 31, 2023, our Ukrainian operations had approximately $0.5 billion in total assets, excluding intercompany balances.In Russia, we are continuously assessing the evolving situation in the country, including recent regulatory constraints in the market entailing very complex terms and conditions that must be met for any divestment transaction to be granted approval by the authorities; and restrictions resulting from international regulations. As of March 31, 2023, our Russian operations had approximately $2.4 billion in total assets, excluding intercompany balances, of which approximately $0.4 billion consisted of cash and equivalents held mostly in local currency (Russian rubles).These developments above have and will continue to have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position, and may result in impairment charges.For further details, see Note 3. War in Ukraine to our condensed consolidated financial statements as well as the "Trade Policy" and  "Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results" sections of this MD&A.
•Net Revenues - Net revenues of $8.0 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $273 million, or 3.5%, from the comparable 2022 amount.  The change in our net revenues from the comparable 2022 amount was driven by the following (variances not to scale with quarterly results):
During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 2.1%, mainly reflecting a favorable pricing variance, primarily driven by higher combustible tobacco pricing, partly offset by lower HTU (net) pricing. Volume/mix was slightly unfavorable, with lower cigarette volume and unfavorable smoke-free product mix largely offset by higher HTU and device volume, as well as favorable cigarette mix. The 2023 net revenues included a charge of $80 million following the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East, shown in "Other" and further described above and in the following "Diluted Earnings Per Share" discussion.   Net revenues by product category for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, are shown below:
•Diluted Earnings Per Share - The changes in our reported diluted earnings per share (“diluted EPS”) for the three months ended March 31, 2023, from the comparable 2022 amounts, were as follows:
Charges related to the war in Ukraine – During the first quarter of 2022, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $42 million (representing $39 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.03 per share), related to circumstances driven by the war, including inventory write-downs, additional allowances for receivables and the cost of PMI’s humanitarian efforts.  For further details, see Note 3. War in Ukraine.  Fair value adjustment for equity security investments – In the first quarter of 2022, we recorded an unfavorable fair value adjustment for our equity security investments in India and Sri Lanka of $47 million after tax (or $0.03 per share decrease in diluted EPS). The fair value adjustment for our equity security investments was included in equity investments and securities (income)/loss, net ($60 million loss) and provision for income taxes ($13 million benefit) on the condensed consolidated statements of earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2022. For further details, see Note 14. Related Parties - Equity Investments and Other.  Amortization and impairment of intangibles – During the first quarter of 2023 and 2022, we recorded amortization and impairment of intangibles of $81 million (representing $64 million net of income tax or $0.04 per share decrease in diluted EPS) and $38 million (representing $32 million net of income tax or $0.02 per share decrease in diluted EPS), respectively.  The pre-tax amortization and impairment of intangibles amount in 2023 and 2022 represented amortization expense primarily due to increased acquired intangible assets recorded as a result of our acquisitions in 2021 and 2022.  For further details, see Note 6. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, net.Asset impairment and exit costs – As discussed above, in the first quarter of 2023, we recorded pre-tax asset impairment and exit costs of $109 million, representing $96 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.06 per share, related to a project to fully outsource and restructure the manufacturing of e-vapor devices and consumables.  For further details, see Note 17. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs. Termination of distribution arrangement in the Middle East – As discussed above, following the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East, we recorded a pre-tax charge of $80 million in the first quarter of 2023 (representing $70 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.04 per share). The pre-tax charge was recorded as a reduction of net revenues in the condensed consolidated statements of earnings and was included in the SSEA, CIS & MEA segment results.Swedish Match AB acquisition accounting related item – During the first quarter of 2023, we recorded pre-tax purchase accounting adjustments of $18 million related to the sale of acquired inventories stepped up to fair value (representing $13 million net of income tax and a diluted EPS charge of $0.01 per share).  These pre-tax adjustments were recorded in cost of sales in the condensed consolidated statements of earnings for the three months ended March 31, 2023.  For further details on the Swedish Match acquisition, see Note 2. Acquisitions.Income taxes – The 2023 Tax benefit associated with Swedish Match financing that increased our 2023 diluted EPS by $0.05 per share in the table above was due to a deferred tax benefit for unrealized foreign currency losses on intercompany loans related to the Swedish Match acquisition financing reflected in the condensed consolidated statements of earnings, while the underlying pre-tax foreign currency movements fully offset in the condensed consolidated statements of earnings and were reflected as currency translation adjustments in the condensed consolidated statements of stockholders' (deficit) equity at March 31, 2023.    Currency –  The unfavorable impact of $0.13 per share during the reporting period primarily results from the fluctuations of the U.S. dollar, especially against the Egyptian pound, Euro and Japanese yen. This unfavorable currency movement has impacted our profitability across our primary revenue markets and local currency cost bases.Interest – The unfavorable impact of $0.04 per share from interest in the table above was due primarily to higher interest expense in connection with the Swedish Match acquisition, partially offset by higher net interest income driven by higher interest rates.Operations – The decrease in diluted EPS of $0.03 from our operations in the table above was due primarily to the following segments:    •Europe: Unfavorable volume/mix, higher marketing, administration and research costs and higher manufacturing costs; •SSEA, CIS & MEA: Higher marketing, administration and research costs, unfavorable volume/mix, higher manufacturing costs and the impact of lower fees for certain distribution rights billed to customers in certain markets, partly offset by favorable pricing;•Americas: Higher marketing, administration and research costs, unfavorable volume/mix and higher manufacturing costs, partly offset by favorable pricing; and•Wellness and Healthcare: Primarily reflecting investments in research and development; partially offset by•Swedish Match: Reflecting the 2023 impact following the fourth quarter 2022 acquisition; and •EA, AU & PMI DF: Favorable volume/mix and lower manufacturing costs.  For further details, see the “Consolidated Operating Results” and “Operating Results by Business Segment” sections of the following “Discussion and Analysis.”
For information on our critical accounting estimates, see "Critical Accounting Estimates" in the MD&A included in Item 7 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022.
See pages 88-99 for a discussion of our "Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results." Our net revenues and operating income by segment are shown in the table below:
Our net revenues by product category are shown in the table below:
Note: Sum of product categories or Regions might not foot to total PMI due to roundings. Items affecting the comparability of results from operations were as follows:•Termination of distribution arrangement in the Middle East – In the first quarter of 2023, PMI recorded a pre-tax charge of $80 million following the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East.  This pre-tax charge was recorded as a reduction of net revenues in the condensed consolidated statements of earnings, and was included in the SSEA, CIS & MEA segment results for the three months ended March 31, 2023.  •Charges related to the war in Ukraine – In the first quarter of 2022, PMI recorded a pre-tax charge of $42 million related to the war in Ukraine. This pre-tax charge was included in the Europe segment for the three months ended March 31, 2022.  For further details, see Note 3. War in Ukraine.•Swedish Match AB acquisition accounting related item - See Note 2. Acquisitions for details of the $18 million pre-tax purchase accounting adjustments related to the sale of acquired inventories stepped up to fair value included in the Swedish Match segment for the three months ended March 31, 2023.•Asset impairment and exit costs – See Note 17. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs for details of the $109 million pre-tax charges for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as well as a breakdown of these costs by segment.Following the Swedish Match acquisition and a review of PMI and Swedish Match’s combined product portfolio, PMI reclassified certain of its own products previously reported under its combustible tobacco product category to the newly created smoke-free product category to better reflect the characteristics of these products. This reclassification did not impact PMI’s consolidated financial position, results of operations or cash flows in any of the periods presented. For further details, see Note 9. Segment Reporting.Net revenues related to combustible tobacco products refer to the operating revenues generated from the sale of these products, including shipping and handling charges billed to customers, net of sales and promotion incentives, and excise taxes.  These net revenue amounts consist of the sale of our cigarettes and other tobacco products that are combusted. Other tobacco products primarily include roll-your-own and make-your-own cigarettes, pipe tobacco, cigars and cigarillos and do not include smoke-free products.Net revenues related to smoke-free products refer to the operating revenues generated from the sale of these products, including shipping and handling charges billed to customers, net of sales and promotion incentives, and excise taxes, if applicable.  These net revenue amounts consist of the sale of all of our products that are not combustible tobacco products, such as heat-not-burn,  e-vapor, and oral nicotine products, also including wellness and healthcare products, as well as consumer accessories such as lighters and matches.Net revenues related to wellness and healthcare products consist of operating revenues generated from the sale of products primarily associated with inhaled therapeutics, and oral and intra-oral delivery systems that are included in the operating results of our Wellness and Healthcare business, Vectura Fertin Pharma.  PMI's heat-not-burn products include licensed KT&G heat-not-burn products.References to "Cost/Other" in the Consolidated Financial Summary table of total PMI and the six segments throughout this "Discussion and Analysis" reflects the currency-neutral variances of: cost of sales (excluding the volume/mix cost component); marketing, administration and research costs (including asset impairment and exit costs); and amortization and impairment of intangibles. “Cost/Other” also includes the currency-neutral net revenue variance, unrelated to volume/mix and price components, attributable to: fees for certain distribution rights billed to customers in certain markets in the SSEA, CIS & MEA Region and the revenue adjustment for the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East. Our consolidated shipment volume is shown in the table below:
Note: Sum may not foot to total due to roundingsFollowing the deconsolidation of our Canadian subsidiary, we continue to report the volume of brands sold by RBH for which other PMI subsidiaries are the trademark owners. These include HEETS, Next, Philip Morris and Rooftop.  Heated tobacco units ("HTU") is the term we use to refer to heated tobacco consumables, which include our BLENDS, HEETS, HEETS Creations, HEETS Dimensions, HEETS Marlboro and HEETS FROM MARLBORO (defined collectively as HEETS), Marlboro Dimensions, Marlboro HeatSticks, Parliament HeatSticks, SENTIA and TEREA, as well as the KT&G-licensed brands, Fiit and Miix (outside of South Korea).Unless otherwise stated, market share for HTUs is defined as the in-market sales volume for HTUs as a percentage of the total estimated industry sales volume for cigarettes and HTUs.  References to total industry, total market, our shipment volume and our market share performance reflect cigarettes and heated tobacco units, unless otherwise stated.Total industry volume, PMI in-market sales volume and PMI market share for the following geographies include the cigarillo category in Japan: the total international market, EA, AU & PMI DF Region, and Japanese domestic market. References to total international market, defined as worldwide cigarette and heated tobacco unit volume excluding the United States, total industry, total market and market shares throughout this "Discussion and Analysis" are our estimates for tax-paid products based on the latest available data from a number of internal and external sources and may, in defined instances, exclude China and/or our duty free business.  2022 estimates for total industry volume and market share in certain geographies reflect limitations on the availability and accuracy of industry data during pandemic-related restrictions.In-market sales ("IMS") is defined as sales to the retail channel, depending on the market and distribution model. From time to time, PMI’s shipment volumes are subject to the impact of distributor inventory movements (or wholesaler inventory movements in certain markets where PMI does not sell to distributors), and estimated total industry/market volumes are subject to the impact of inventory movements in various trade channels that include estimated trade inventory movements of PMI’s competitors arising from market-specific factors that significantly distort reported volume disclosures. Such factors may include changes to the manufacturing supply chain, shipment methods, consumer demand, timing of excise tax increases or other influences that may affect the timing of sales to customers. In such instances, in addition to reviewing PMI shipment volumes and certain estimated total industry/market volumes on a reported basis, management reviews these measures on an adjusted basis that excludes the impact of distributor and/or estimated trade inventory movements.  Management also believes that disclosing PMI shipment volumes and estimated total industry/market volumes in such circumstances on a basis that excludes the impact of distributor and/or estimated trade inventory movements improves the comparability of performance and trends for these measures over different reporting periods.
Key market data regarding total market size, our shipments and market share are shown in the tables below:
The following discussion compares our consolidated operating results for the three months ended March 31, 2023, with the three months ended March 31, 2022.
During the quarter, estimated international industry volume (excluding China and the U.S.) for cigarettes and heated tobacco units was essentially stable, reflecting a decline in the SSEA, CIS & MEA Region, partly offset by increases in the Europe Region, the EA, AU & PMI DF Region and the Americas Region, as described in the Regional sections.For the full year 2023, we currently expect an estimated total international industry volume decline for cigarettes and HTUs, excluding China and the U.S., of 1% to 2%.
Our total cigarette and HTU shipment volume decreased by 1.1%, reflecting a 3.1% decline in cigarette shipments (mainly due to the Europe, SSEA, CIS & MEA, and EA, AU & PMI DF Regions), partly offset by a 10.4% increase in HTU shipments (primarily driven by the EA, AU & PMI DF Region). Cigarette shipment volume for Marlboro decreased by 2.4% to 55.9 billion units.Our total oral product shipment volume increased by +100%, driven by the Swedish Match acquisition. For comparison purposes, assuming the inclusion of Swedish Match's first quarter 2022 shipment volume prior to our acquisition, total oral product shipment volume increased by 9.7%, primarily reflecting growth in nicotine pouches (particularly in the U.S. and Scandinavia), partly offset by a decline for snus (mainly in Scandinavia).  Volume comparisons versus Swedish Match's first quarter 2022 results reflect data sourced from company disclosures, available at www.swedishmatch.com/investors.  For the full year 2023, we currently expect a total cigarette and HTU shipment volume change for PMI of approximately flat to +1%: •HTU shipment volume of 125 to 130 billion units, broadly in line with anticipated adjusted in-market sales volume and reflecting an acceleration in growth versus 2022; and •A cigarette shipment volume decline of approximately 2.5% to 3.5%.
Excluding the net unfavorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements, PMI’s total in-market sales for cigarettes and HTUs was essentially stable with a decrease of 0.1%, reflecting a decline of 2.1% for cigarettes, partly offset by 11.4% growth for HTUs.However, in certain markets, in-market sales volumes are not measured at the point of distributor sales to the retail trade, as the data is not available. In such cases, shipments serve as the proxy. As a result, shipment volume fluctuations can impact in-market sales volumes and reported market share, which therefore may not be representative of consumer offtake dynamics. Given the related volatility observed this quarter, we are also providing select metrics based on estimated in-market sales volume on an adjusted basis, where available, when there is a significant difference between estimated offtake performance and in-market sales data. The volatility is more pronounced for HTUs, given the relatively small volume base compared to cigarettes in certain markets. Adjusted in-market sales volume and market share exclude the net impact of estimated distributor and wholesaler inventory movements.In the first quarter, adjusted in-market sales volume for HTUs increased by 16%, further demonstrating continued strong growth momentum for IQOS. The divergence between HTU shipment volume and estimated consumer offtake in the quarter primarily reflected the reversal in several European markets of  inventory build-ups at the end of the fourth quarter of 2022 to meet the needs of ILUMA launches, and to create safety stock to mitigate the risk of production and distribution constraints due to energy shortages. In the first quarter, PMI was able to decrease the level of blade HTU inventories in several markets to reduce the risk of obsolete stock (given the rapid transition to ILUMA), and also adjust safety stock levels as the risk of energy shortages receded.
(1) Cost/Other variance includes charges in 2023 of $80 million following the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East.(2) Cost/Other variance includes charges in 2023 of $18 million related to a Swedish Match AB acquisition accounting related item, partially offset by charges in 2022 of $26 million related to the war in Ukraine.  For more details, see Note 2. Acquisitions and Note 3. War in Ukraine.(3) Cost/Other variance includes charges in 2023 of $109 million related to asset impairment and exit costs, partly offset by charges in 2022 of $16 million related to the war in Ukraine. For more details, see Note 3. War in Ukraine and Note 17. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs.During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 2.1%, mainly reflecting a favorable pricing variance, primarily driven by higher combustible tobacco pricing, partly offset by lower HTU (net) pricing. Volume/mix was slightly unfavorable, with lower cigarette volume and unfavorable smoke-free product mix largely offset by higher HTU and device volume, as well as favorable cigarette mix. The 2023 net revenues included a charge of $80 million following the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East, shown in "Cost/Other".   The unfavorable currency in net revenues was due primarily to the Egyptian pound, Euro, Indonesian rupiah and Japanese yen, partly offset by the Russian ruble.Net revenues include $2.8 billion in 2023 and $2.4 billion in 2022 related to the of smoke-free products.  Operating income decreased by 17.2%.  Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 15.2%, primarily  reflecting: the impact of 2023 asset impairment and exit costs of $109 million and the termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East of $80 million, partly offset by the 2022 charges of $42 million related to the war in Ukraine. In addition to these items, operating income was also negatively impacted by: higher marketing, administration and research costs (primarily due to inflationary impacts and lower commercial investments in the prior period); unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to lower cigarette volume and unfavorable HTU mix, partly offset by higher HTU volume; and higher manufacturing costs (primarily due to inflationary impacts and higher logistics costs, partly offset by productivity); partially offset by the favorable pricing variance.As smoke-free products continue to grow as a proportion of our business, a temporary dilutive margin impact is likely to continue, due to the transitory impacts associated with the IQOS ILUMA roll-out, including the margin impact of accelerated device replacements and higher initial costs of devices and consumables.  Like many other global companies, we are facing continued global inflationary pressures, primarily impacting cost of sales for the combustible tobacco business (notably related to leaf, acetate tow and energy prices) and overall inflationary impacts on marketing, administration and research costs. We expect these inflationary pressures to continue.Interest expense, net, of $230 million increased by $76 million or 49.4%, primarily due to higher interest expense in connection with the Swedish Match acquisition, partially offset by higher net interest income driven by higher interest rates.Our effective tax rate decreased by 2.4 percentage points to 17.3%.  For further details, see Note 11. Income Taxes.  Net earnings attributable to PMI of $2.0 billion decreased by $336 million or 14.4%.  This decrease was due primarily to lower operating income as discussed above, partly offset by a lower effective tax rate.  Basic EPS and diluted EPS of $1.28 decreased by 14.7%.  Excluding an unfavorable currency impact of $0.13, diluted EPS decreased by 6.0%.
The tobacco industry and our company face a number of challenges that may adversely affect our business, volume, results of operations, cash flows and financial position.  These challenges, which are discussed below and in “Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results,” include:•regulatory restrictions on our products, including restrictions on the packaging, marketing, and sale of tobacco or other nicotine-containing products or related devices that could reduce our competitiveness, eliminate our ability to communicate with adult consumers, or even ban certain of our products;•fiscal challenges, such as excessive excise tax increases and discriminatory tax structures;•illicit trade in cigarettes and other tobacco and nicotine-containing products, including counterfeit, contraband and so-called “illicit whites”; •intense competition, including from non-tax paid volume by certain local manufacturers;•pending and threatened litigation as discussed in Note 10. Contingencies; and•governmental investigations.Regulatory Restrictions: The tobacco industry operates in a highly regulated environment.  The well-known risks of smoking have led regulators to impose significant restrictions and high excise taxes on cigarettes.  Much of the regulation that shapes the business environment in which we operate is driven by the World Health Organization's (the "WHO") Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (the "FCTC"), which entered into force in 2005. The main objective of the FCTC is to establish a global agenda for tobacco regulation, with the purpose of reducing tobacco use.  To date, 182 countries and the European Union ("EU")  are Parties to the FCTC.  The treaty requires Parties to have in place various tobacco control measures and recommends others.  The FCTC governing body, the Conference of the Parties (“CoP”), has also adopted non-binding guidelines and policy recommendations related to certain articles of the FCTC that go beyond the text of the treaty.  In October 2018, the CoP recognized the need for more scientific assessment and improved reporting to define policy on heated tobacco products.  Similar to its previous policy recommendations on e-cigarettes, the CoP invited countries to regulate, restrict or prohibit heated tobacco products, as appropriate under their national laws. Prior to the Ninth Session of the CoP ("CoP 9") to the FCTC, which took place in November 2021, the WHO and the WHO FCTC Secretariat published two reports on novel and emerging tobacco products.  The reports were noted by CoP 9 and related substantive discussions and decisions were deferred to CoP 10, currently scheduled for 2023. It is not possible to predict whether or to what extent measures recommended by the WHO's reports will be implemented as the reports are not binding to the WHO Member States.We believe that when better alternatives to cigarettes exist, the discussion should not be whether these alternatives should be made available to the more than one billion people who smoke today, but how fast, and  within what regulatory framework to maximize their adoption while minimizing unintended use. Therefore, we advocate for regulatory frameworks that are based on a continuum of risk where non-combustible products fall below combustible cigarettes.  Product regulation should include measures that encourage and accelerate switching to non-combustible products, for example, by allowing adult consumers who would not otherwise quit to receive truthful and non-misleading information about such products to enable them to make informed decisions and by applying uniform product standards to enable manufacturers to demonstrate the reduction in harmful and potentially harmful constituents, as well as the absence of combustion. Regulation should also include specific rules for ingredients, labeling and consumer communication, and should ensure that the public is informed about the health risks of all combustible and non-combustible tobacco and nicotine-containing products. Importantly, regulation must include measures designed to prevent initiation by youth and non-smokers. We support mandated health warnings, minimum age laws, restrictions on advertising, and public place smoking restrictions. We also support regulatory measures that help reduce illicit trade. Certain measures are discussed in more detail below and in the Reduced-Risk Products (RRPs) section.Fiscal Challenges: Excessive and disruptive excise, sales and other tax increases and discriminatory tax structures are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on our profitability, due to lower consumption and consumer down-trading to non-premium, discount, other low-price or low-taxed combustible tobacco products such as fine cut tobacco and illicit cigarettes. In addition, in certain jurisdictions, some of our combustible tobacco products are subject to tax structures that discriminate against premium-price products and manufactured cigarettes. We believe that such tax policies undermine public health by encouraging consumers to turn to illicit trade, and ultimately undercut government revenue objectives, disrupt the competitive environment, and encourage criminal activity. Other jurisdictions have imposed, or are seeking to impose, levies or other taxes specifically on tobacco companies, such as taxes on revenues and/or profits. World Customs Organization Developments: In 2020, the World Customs Organization (the “WCO”) amended the harmonized system nomenclature to introduce dedicated custom codes for novel tobacco and nicotine products, including heated tobacco products, e-cigarettes and other nicotine-containing products. The amendments became effective as of January 1, 2022. These amendments are not expected to significantly impact current customs duty rates. As of December 2022, and out of 160 contracting parties to the WCO’s Harmonized System Convention, 94 contracting parties, including the EU and the U.S., have notified the WCO that they have implemented the 2022 edition of the Harmonized System, creating new dedicated customs codes for novel tobacco and nicotine products.EU Tobacco Products Directive ("TPD"): In April 2014, the EU adopted a significantly revised TPD, which entered into force in May 2016. All member states have adopted laws transposing the TPD.  The TPD sets forth a comprehensive set of regulatory requirements for tobacco products, including:•health warnings covering 65% of the front and back panels of cigarette packs, with an option for member states to further standardize tobacco packaging, including the introduction of plain packaging;•a ban on characterizing flavors in some tobacco products, with a transition period for menthol that expired in May 2020; •security features and tracking and tracing measures that became effective in May 2019; and•a framework for the regulation of novel tobacco products and e-cigarettes, including requirements for health warnings and information leaflets, a prohibition on product packaging text related to reduced risk, and the introduction of notification requirements or authorization procedures in advance of commercialization.In May 2021, the European Commission published its first report on the application of the TPD.  The report identifies significant progress made due to the implementation of the TPD and where there is still room for improvement. Most notably, it finds that the EU legislation has enhanced tobacco control, which contributed to protecting the health of EU citizens by providing Member States with strong rules to address the use of tobacco products in the EU. The TPD reportedly achieved the 2% reduction target of the impact assessment with decreased smoking prevalence among youth. The report also concludes that there is scope for improvement in certain areas, such as enforcement at national level, assessment of ingredients, and a better consideration for novel and emerging products.In November 2021, the European Commission published the implementation roadmap to Europe's Beating Cancer Plan (the "Plan"). According to the Plan, a revision of the TPD is planned for 2024. EU Tobacco Excise Directive ("TED"): The EU Commission is preparing a legislative proposal for the revision of the 2011 EU Tobacco Excise Directive that may include definitions and tax treatment for novel tobacco and nicotine-containing products, including heated tobacco products, e-cigarettes and nicotine pouches. The proposal, after several delays, is now expected to be published during the first half of 2023 and adopted by the EU Council in the course of 2024. Any final amendments to TED require unanimous agreement by all EU Member States, followed by transposition of TED into national legislation. The earliest potential effective date for any changes to TED, after the transposition period, is 2025.Plain Packaging and Other Packaging Restrictions: Plain packaging legislation bans the use of branding, logos and colors on packaging other than the brand name and variant that may be printed only in specified locations and in a uniform font. To date, plain packaging laws have been adopted in certain markets in all of our operating segments, including the key markets of Australia, France, Saudi Arabia and Turkey. Some countries, such as Canada, Denmark and Israel adopted plain packaging regulations that apply to all tobacco products, including RRPs.  Other countries are also considering plain packaging legislation.Some countries have adopted, or are considering adopting, packaging restrictions that could have an impact similar to plain packaging.  Examples of such restrictions include standardizing the shape and size of packages, prohibiting certain colors or the use of certain descriptive phrases on packaging, and requiring very large graphic health warnings that leave little space for branding.  Restrictions and Bans on the Use of Ingredients: The WHO and others in the public health community have recommended restrictions or total bans on the use of some or all ingredients in tobacco products, including menthol.  Broad restrictions and ingredient bans would require us to reformulate our American blend tobacco products and could reduce our ability to differentiate these products in the market in the long term.  In many countries, menthol bans would eliminate the entire category of mentholated tobacco products. The EU banned cigarettes and roll-your-own tobacco products with characterizing flavors. Other tobacco products, including heated tobacco products, are currently exempted from this characterizing flavor ban. However, on November 23, 2022, the EU Commission published a delegated directive that will eliminate this exemption. All EU Member States are required to apply the delegated directive as of October 23, 2023, and ban the use of characterizing flavors in heated tobacco products in the EU, impacting a significant proportion of our RRP products currently sold in the EU. While we cannot predict the ultimate impact on our business from this ban, consumer switching to non-flavored products was high in reaction to past bans on flavors in other categories and markets. We therefore believe any impact will be manageable, with consumers switching to non-flavored products partially mitigating the effect of the ban. We will continue to actively monitor relevant developments in the EU market. Other countries may follow the EU’s approach toward tobacco product ingredients.  Turkey banned menthol as of May 2020.  Broader ingredient bans have been adopted by Brazil and Canada. Bans on Display of Tobacco Products at Retail: In a number of our markets, including, but not limited to, Australia and Russia, governments have banned the display of tobacco products at the point of sale.  Other countries are considering similar bans. Bans and Restrictions on Advertising, Marketing, Promotions and Sponsorships: For many years, the FCTC has called for, and countries have imposed, partial or total bans on tobacco advertising, marketing, promotions and sponsorships, including bans and restrictions on advertising on radio and television, in print and on the Internet.  The FCTC's non-binding guidelines recommend that governments prohibit all forms of communication with adult smokers.Restrictions on Product Design:  Some members of the public health community are calling for the further standardization of tobacco products by requiring, for example, that cigarettes have a certain minimum diameter, which would amount to a ban on slim cigarettes, or requiring the use of standardized filter and cigarette paper designs. In addition, at its meeting in November 2016, the CoP adopted non-binding guidelines recommending that countries regulate product design features that increase the attractiveness of tobacco products, such as the diameter of cigarettes and the use of flavor capsules. Restrictions on Public Smoking and Use of Nicotine-Containing Products in Public: The pace and scope of restrictions on the use of our products have increased significantly in most of our markets.  Many countries around the world have adopted, or are likely to adopt, regulations that restrict or ban smoking and use of nicotine-containing products in public and/or work places, restaurants, bars and nightclubs. Some public health groups have called for, and some countries, regional governments and municipalities have adopted or proposed, bans on smoking in outdoor places, as well as bans on smoking in cars (typically, when minors are present) and private homes.Other Regulatory Issues: Some regulators are considering, or in some cases have adopted, regulatory measures designed to reduce the supply of tobacco products.  These include regulations intended to reduce the number of retailers selling tobacco products by, for example, reducing the overall number of tobacco retail licenses available or banning the sale of tobacco products within specified distances of certain public facilities. Other regulators are also considering generation sales bans, under which the sale of certain tobacco or nicotine products to people born after a certain year would be prohibited. On December 13, 2022, the New Zealand parliament passed a bill introducing regulatory measures restricting the sale and supply of smoked tobacco products, including reducing the number of retail outlets licensed to sell smoked tobacco products, imposing a maximum limit of nicotine content for smoked tobacco products and prohibiting the sale of smoked tobacco products to anyone born on or after January 1, 2009. These measures are limited to smoked tobacco products and do not apply to heated tobacco products and e-cigarettes.  In Mexico, a new law came into force on December 12, 2022, prohibiting imports and exports of certain nicotine and non-nicotine delivery and consumption systems, as well as the consumables used in those systems, including much of our RRP portfolio.  On December 16, 2022, the Mexican Federal Government enacted an implementation regulation for the tobacco control law, which includes (i) a point of sale display ban of tobacco products; (ii) restrictions on where tobacco products can be consumed, and (iii) prohibition to communicate corporate social responsibility programs funded by the tobacco industry. On March 27, 2023, the Argentinian Ministry of Health, through publication of  Resolution 565/2023 in the Official Gazette, prohibited the import, distribution, commercialization and advertising of heated tobacco products, including related devices. The resolution entered into force on March 28, 2023. The country had previously banned the use of electronic cigarettes in 2011. On February 15, 2023, a bill amending the Tobacco Hazards Prevention and Control Act was adopted in Taiwan and entered into force in March 22, 2023. It regulates heated tobacco products but bans e-cigarettes.  The amendment particularly specifies that designated tobacco products (including heated tobacco products) that are neither cigarettes, cut tobacco, cigars, snuff nor chewing tobacco, have to undergo a health risk assessment as part of an authorization system. The Taiwanese central health authority has announced on March 22, 2023 that heated tobacco products are designated tobacco products.On January 1, 2023, a law regulating the marketing of nicotine pouches went into effect in Slovakia. The regulatory framework  contains a minimum purchase legal age (18 years), a nicotine limit, and a labelling requirement. On December 6, 2022, the Dutch Government published a draft bill to ban the placing on the market of nicotine pouches in the Netherlands.  On December 16, 2022, a  notification period to the EU Commission expired for a Belgian Royal Decree to ban nicotine pouches. Based on this decree, the Belgian Government could ban the placing on the market of nicotine pouches in Belgium. In a limited number of markets, most notably Japan, we are dependent on governmental approvals that may limit our pricing flexibility.The EU Single-Use Plastics Directive, which will require tobacco manufacturers and importers to cover the costs of public collection systems for tobacco product filters, under Extended Producer Responsibility ("EPR") schemes, entered into force on July 2, 2019. To date, some member states transposed the Directive into national legislation.  We expect remaining member states to transpose the EU Single-Use Plastics Directive into national legislation including EPR schemes by January 2023. While we cannot predict the impact of this initiative on our business at this time, we are monitoring developments in this area.In some countries, including in the EU, cigarettes are subject to testing, disclosure and mandatory emissions limits for tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide and other smoke constituents. In the Netherlands, several public health organizations have requested that the Dutch enforcement body enforce the requirements for maximum tar, nicotine, and carbon monoxide ("TNCO") emissions levels for cigarettes using a test method other than the method currently set forth in the EU TPD and transposed into national legislation. This request followed publication of a report by the Dutch State Institute for Public Health & Environment, which found that all cigarette brands sold in the Netherlands exceeded the maximum TNCO levels when measured under an alternative method. The Dutch enforcement body declined the request, and the applicants have challenged such decision in pending legal proceedings in the Netherlands. While we are not parties to the proceeding and cannot predict the outcome, a decision to enforce the existing TNCO ceilings in the Netherlands using the alternative test method could impact a significant portion of the manufactured cigarettes available on the market in the Netherlands and could lead to similar actions in other EU countries. Illicit Trade: Illicit tobacco trade creates a cheap and unregulated supply of tobacco products, undermines efforts to reduce smoking prevalence, especially among youth, damages legitimate businesses and intellectual property rights, stimulates organized crime, increases corruption and reduces government tax revenue. We generally estimate that, excluding China and the U.S., illicit trade may account for as much as 12% of global cigarette consumption; this includes counterfeit, contraband and the persistent problem of “illicit whites,” which are cigarettes legally purchased in one jurisdiction for the sole purpose of being exported and illegally sold in another jurisdiction where they have no legitimate market. Currently, we estimate that illicit trade in the EU accounted for approximately 8% of total cigarette consumption in 2022.A number of jurisdictions are considering actions to prevent illicit trade. In November 2012, the FCTC adopted the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (the “Protocol”), which includes supply chain control measures,  such as licensing of manufacturers and distributors, enforcement  of these control measures in free trade zones, controls on duty free and Internet channels and the implementation of tracking and tracing technologies. To date, 66 Parties, including the EU, have ratified it.  The Protocol came into force in September 2018. Since then, implementation in national legislations have been ongoing. In November 2021, the second Meeting of the Parties to the Protocol decided, among others, to focus on the implementation of a framework for global information sharing to combat illicit tobacco trade and enable the parties to exchange products' tracking and tracing information in a secure manner. We welcome this decision and expect that other countries will ratify the Protocol.We devote substantial resources to help prevent illicit trade in combustible tobacco products and RRPs. For example, we engage with governments, our business partners and other stakeholders to implement effective measures to combat illicit trade and, in some instances, pursue legal remedies to protect our intellectual property rights.The tracking and tracing regulations for cigarettes and roll-your-own products manufactured or destined for the EU became effective on May 20, 2019.  The effective date for other tobacco-containing products, including some of our RRPs such as heated tobacco units, is May 20, 2024.  While we expect that this regulation will increase our operating expenses, we do not expect this increase to be significant.In 2009, our Colombian subsidiaries entered into an Investment and Cooperation Agreement with the national and regional governments of Colombia to promote investment in, and cooperation on, anti-contraband and anti-counterfeit efforts. The agreement provides $200 million in funding over a 20-year period to address issues such as combating illegal cigarette trade and increasing the quality and quantity of locally-grown tobacco.In May 2016, PMI launched PMI IMPACT, a global initiative that supports third-party projects dedicated to fighting illegal trade and related crimes such as corruption, organized criminal networks and money laundering. The centerpiece of PMI IMPACT is a council of external independent experts in the fields of law, anti-corruption and law enforcement responsible for evaluating and approving funding proposals for PMI IMPACT grants.  PMI has pledged $100 million to fund projects within PMI IMPACT over three funding rounds. The third funding round is ongoing.
Our Approach to RRPs: We recognize that smoking cigarettes causes serious diseases and that the best way to avoid the harms of smoking is to never start or to quit.  Nevertheless, it is predicted that by 2025, the number of smokers will remain largely unchanged from the current estimate of 1.1 billion, despite the considerable efforts to discourage smoking.  Cigarettes burn tobacco, which produces smoke.  As a result of the combustion process, the smoker inhales various toxic substances.  In contrast, RRPs do not burn tobacco and therefore contain significantly lower levels of harmful and potentially harmful constituents ("HPHCs") than found in cigarette smoke.For adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes, we believe that RRPs, while not risk-free, offer a much better choice.  Accordingly, our key strategic priorities are to: (i)  develop and commercialize products that present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to those products versus continued smoking; and (ii) educate and encourage current adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes to switch to those products.We recognize that this transformation from cigarettes to RRPs will take time and that the speed of transformation will depend in part upon factors beyond our control, such as the willingness of governments, regulators and other policy groups to embrace RRPs, as a desired alternative to continued cigarette smoking. As a leading international cigarette manufacturer, we will continue to accelerate this transformation by using our extensive commercial and distribution infrastructure as an effective platform for the commercialization of our RRPs and communication with adult smokers and trade partners about the benefits of switching to our RRPs. For as long as a significant number of adult smokers continue to smoke cigarettes, responsible leadership of the category is critical. We aim to maintain our competitive position in the cigarette market through selective investment.While seeking to remain competitive in the cigarette market, we are judiciously reallocating resources from cigarettes to RRPs and are streamlining our cigarette portfolio.We have a range of RRPs in various stages of development, scientific assessment and commercialization.  We conduct rigorous scientific assessments of our RRP platforms to substantiate that they reduce exposure to HPHCs and, ultimately, that these products present, are likely to present, or have the potential to present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to them versus continued smoking. We draw upon a team of expert scientists and engineers from a broad spectrum of scientific disciplines and our extensive learnings of adult consumer preferences to further develop and assess our RRPs. Our efforts are guided by the following key objectives:•to develop RRPs that adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes find to be satisfying alternatives to smoking;•for those adult smokers, our goal is to offer RRPs with a scientifically substantiated risk-reduction profile that approaches as closely as possible the risk-reduction profile associated with smoking cessation; •to substantiate the reduction of risk for the individual adult smoker and the reduction of harm to the population as a whole, based on scientific evidence of the highest standard that is made available for scrutiny and review by external independent scientists and relevant regulatory bodies; and•to advocate for the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs, including the communication of scientifically substantiated information to enable adult smokers to make better  choices.Our RRP Platforms: Our product development is based on the elimination of combustion via tobacco heating and other innovative systems, which we believe are the most promising path to providing a better consumer choice for those who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes. We recognize that no single product will appeal to all adult smokers. Therefore, we are developing a portfolio of  products intended to appeal to a variety of distinct adult consumer preferences and achieve population harm reduction.Five PMI-developed or improved RRP platforms are in various stages of development and commercialization readiness:         Platform 1 uses a precisely controlled heating device incorporating our IQOS HeatControl technology, into which a specially designed and proprietary tobacco unit is inserted and heated to generate an aerosol. We have conducted a series of clinical studies for this platform, the results of which were included in our submission to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”). In addition to the original version of Platform 1 which relies on a heating technology using a blade, a new version of Platform 1 is now available using induction instead of heating a blade. All studies referenced above were conducted with the blade version of Platform 1. We believe that there is full comparability between the subsequent Platform 1 versions, and therefore the data from these studies remain valid. In 2022, we also began the initial launch of a heated tobacco product using external resistive heating technology and commercialized under the BONDS brand.     Platform 2 used a pressed carbon heat source which, when ignited, generates a nicotine-containing aerosol by heating tobacco. As a result of consumer testing feedback, the design of our current Platform 2 technology has been discontinued.  We are assessing alternative designs for this consumer segment.     Platform 3 is a product using nicotine salt that is composed of two parts: a consumable that contains a highly soluble encapsulated nicotine powder and a non-electric device that activates it. Once a consumable is inserted into the mechanical device, the nicotine powder is aerosolized upon inhalation.  The results of our pharmacodynamic study related to this version  indicate this product's potential as an acceptable alternative to continued cigarette smoking in terms of product satisfaction. We are working on product modifications to enable switching by those adult smokers who are looking for better alternatives to cigarettes.     Platform 4 covers e-vapor products, which are battery-powered devices that produce an aerosol by vaporizing a tobacco-free liquid solution. We developed a new e-liquid for our e-vapor products to deliver real tobacco taste satisfaction. Using patented technology, flavors and nicotine are extracted directly from the tobacco leaves and captured in a tobacco-free liquid solution, without having to add flavoring ingredients. In the first quarter of 2023, we initiated a project to fully outsource and restructure the manufacturing of e-vapor devices and consumables. As a result, PMI recorded pre-tax asset impairment and exit costs of $109 million. We intend to focus on commercializing these products in select markets, with an emphasis on profitability.We also entered into a licensing agreement with Kaival Brands International, LLC, in June 2022 to distribute an e-vapor product, known in the U.S. as the BIDI® Stick. The agreement grants PMI certain intellectual property rights relating to the premium e-vapor devices and, potentially, other newly developed devices, to permit PMI to manufacture, promote, sell, and distribute the e-vapor device and, to the extent included, other newly developed devices in international markets outside of the U.S. Platform 5 covers Snus and Modern Oral Nicotine Pouches. Snus refers to dried loose tobacco, or snuff, which is consumed by sniffing the product through the nose,  moist loose tobacco which is put in the mouth between the lower or upper lip and gum, and Snus pouches which contain ground tobacco, water, salt and flavors. Modern Oral Nicotine Pouches consist of white pre-conditioned pouches containing nicotine derived from tobacco. Users place a pouch between the upper lip and gum and leave it there while the nicotine and flavor are being released. At the end of the use, the user can dispose of the pouch. Nicotine pouches are inherently smoke-free as they are consumed orally, and no combustion process occurs during use. They contain primarily nicotine, flavors, and cellulose substrate. The nicotine used in the pouches is of pharmaceutical-grade like the nicotine used in medicinal products, such as gums and inhalers, while the flavors are approved for use in food in accordance with the product quality standards for nicotine pouches developed by the Swedish Institute for Standards. In 2021, PMI acquired AG Snus Aktieselskab ("AG Snus"), a as well as Fertin Pharma A/S, two companies manufacturing and/or marketing nicotine pouches. In 2022, we significantly expanded our Platform 5 products portfolio with the acquisition of Swedish Match. The acquisition also represents an expansion of our RRP presence in the United States market, where Swedish Match's ZYN brand is the leading nicotine pouch franchise.We aim to expand our brand portfolio and market positions with additional RRPs.  In addition, we continue to use our expertise, technology and capabilities to explore new growth opportunities beyond our current business, including products that do not contain nicotine or tobacco.Commercialization of RRPs: We are developing a multiplatform approach and tailoring our commercialization strategy to the characteristics of each specific market. We focus our commercialization efforts on consumer retail experience, guided consumer trials and customer care, and increasingly, digital communication programs and e-commerce.  In order to accelerate switching to our Platform 1 products, our initial market introductions typically entail one-to-one consumer engagement (in person or by digital means) and device discounts.  These initial commercialization efforts require substantial investment, which we believe will moderate over time and further benefit from the increased use of digital engagement capabilities. During the COVID-19 pandemic, we accelerated our investments in, and pivot to, digital consumer engagement. As of March 31, 2023, PMI's smoke-free products were available for sale in 78 markets. In 2014, we introduced our Platform 1 product in pilot city launches in Nagoya, Japan, and in Milan, Italy. Since then, we have continuously expanded our commercialization activities. Data shows that only a very small percentage of adult smokers who convert to our Platform 1 product switch back to cigarettes.We have integrated the production of our heated tobacco units into several of our existing manufacturing facilities, are progressing with our plans to build manufacturing capacity for our other RRP platforms, continue to optimize our manufacturing infrastructure and expand our commercialization activities for new products and markets. We discuss certain risks related to the commercialization and supply of our RRP portfolio in “Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results”.We discuss product warranties in more detail in Note 16. Product Warranty.  The significance of warranty claims is dependent on a number of factors, including device version mix, product failure rates, logistics and service delivery costs, and warranty policies, and may increase with the number of devices sold.  On October 20, 2022, PMI announced that it had reached an agreement with Altria Group, Inc., to end the companies' commercial relationship covering Platform 1 in the U.S. as of April 30, 2024. Thereafter, PMI will have the full rights to commercialize Platform 1 in the U.S.- the world’s largest smoke-free market, effective May 1, 2024. This agreement provides a clear path to expanding Platform 1's international success in a market where approximately 31 million adults continue to smoke. Our commercialization efforts for the other PMI-developed RRP platforms are as follows: •In late 2022, we began commercializing our BONDS product in the Philippines and Colombia.•Since August 2020, we have launched our Platform 4 premium vaping product (branded IQOS VEEV or VEEV) in New Zealand, Czech Republic, Finland, Croatia, Ukraine, Canada, Australia, Corsica, Greece, France, Slovakia and Serbia.•Since June 2022, we have launched our disposable vaping product VEEBA in Canada, the UK, Ukraine, Serbia, Romania, Czech Republic, Slovakia and France. •We launched a Platform 5 product, which currently has a presence in ten markets, including Scandinavian markets. The product is a reformulated version of the already commercialized nicotine pouches bearing the Shiro brand by our affiliate AG Snus.Additionally, following PMI's acquisition of Swedish Match, PMI now has access to a strong portfolio of Swedish Match brands in both the Snus and nicotine pouch categories. Swedish Match nicotine pouches are currently available in more than 20 markets. RRP Regulation and Taxation: RRPs contain nicotine and are not risk-free. As we describe in more detail above, we support science-based regulation and taxation of RRPs, and believe that regulation and taxation should differentiate between cigarettes and products that present, are likely to present, or have the potential to present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to these products versus continued smoking and should recognize a continuum of risk for tobacco and other nicotine-containing products. Regulation, as well as industry practices, should reflect the fact that youth should not consume nicotine in any form.Some governments have banned, or are seeking to ban or severely restrict, emerging tobacco and nicotine-containing products, such as our RRPs, and communication of truthful and non-misleading information about such products.These regulations might foreclose or unreasonably restrict adult consumer access even to products that might be shown to be a better consumer choice than continuing to smoke cigarettes. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, some governments have been and may continue to be temporarily unable to focus on the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs or on the enforcement or implementation of regulations that are significant to our business.We oppose blanket bans and unreasonable restrictions of products that have the potential to present less risk of harm compared to continued cigarette smoking.  By contrast, we support regulation that sets clear standards for all RRP categories and propels innovation to benefit adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes. In the United States, an established regulatory framework for assessing “Modified Risk Tobacco Products” and “New Tobacco Products” exists under the jurisdiction of the FDA.  We submitted to the FDA a Modified Risk Tobacco Product Application (“MRTPA”) for our Platform 1 product in December 2016, and a Premarket Tobacco Product Application (“PMTA”) for our Platform 1 product in March 2017. On April 30, 2019, the FDA determined that a version of our Platform 1 product, namely, IQOS 2.4 and three related consumables, is appropriate for the protection of public health ("APPH") and authorized it for sale in the United States. The FDA’s decision followed its comprehensive assessment of our PMTA. On December 7, 2020, the FDA reached the same determination for the IQOS 3 device and authorized that version of our Platform 1 product for sale in the United States.On July 7, 2020, the FDA determined that the available scientific evidence demonstrates that the issuance of an exposure modification order would be appropriate for the promotion of public health and authorized the marketing of a version of our Platform 1 product, namely IQOS 2.4 and three related consumables, as a "Modified Risk Tobacco Product" ("MRTP"). The FDA authorized the marketing of this product in the U.S. with the following information:
•the IQOS system heats tobacco but does not burn it. •this significantly reduces the production of harmful and potentially harmful chemicals. •scientific studies have shown that switching completely from conventional cigarettes to the IQOS system significantly reduces your body’s exposure to harmful or potentially harmful chemicals."We must request and receive authorization from the FDA in order to continue marketing this product with the same modified exposure information after the present order expires in four years from the date of the orders.The FDA may issue two types of MRTP orders: a “risk modification” order or an “exposure modification” order. We had requested both types of orders for IQOS 2.4 and an initial selection of 3 consumables' variants.  After review, the FDA determined that the evidence did not support issuing a "risk modification" order at this time but that it did support issuing an "exposure modification" order for the product. This determination included a finding that issuance of the exposure modification order is expected to benefit the health of the population as a whole. We also received an exposure modification order for IQOS 3. We look forward to working with the FDA to provide any additional information they may require to market Platform 1 products with reduced risk claims.The FDA’s PMTA and MRTP orders do not mean that the agency “approved” our Platform 1 product.  These authorizations are subject to strict marketing, reporting and other requirements, and are not a guarantee that the product will remain authorized, particularly if there is a significant uptake in youth or non-smoker initiation.  The FDA will monitor the marketing of the product.On March 18, 2021, we submitted to the FDA a supplemental MRTPA ("sMRTPA") for IQOS 3 requesting authorization to market this version of the device as a MRTP with reduced exposure information like IQOS 2.4. In June 2021, the FDA formally accepted and filed our sMRTPA for substantive scientific review, following a period for the public to provide comments on our application. The FDA authorized our sMRTPA for IQOS 3 by issuing a Modified Risk Granted Order – Exposure Modification on March 11, 2022.On April 29, 2022, we submitted the Annual Report for the IQOS Tobacco Heating System ("THS") to the FDA. The report included a systematic review of the literature covering publications related to the IQOS THS between March 1, 2021 and February 28, 2022. 226 publications were identified, of which 132 were in English and contained original research or data on Heated Tobacco Products ("HTPs") (27 from PMI or other tobacco manufacturers and 105 from independent researchers). The report concludes that, although the scientific evidence continues to develop and evolve, the extensive data reviewed confirms that while HTPs are not risk-free, the risks of HTPs are significantly reduced for both users and non-users against the well-proven risks of continued cigarette smoking, and therefore continues to support the APPH status of IQOS THS.On January 26, 2023, the FDA authorized the marketing of two new tobacco-flavored consumables (Marlboro Sienna HeatSticks and Marlboro Bronze HeatSticks) and a modified version of the authorized Marlboro Amber HeatSticks. These products are line extensions and/or modified versions of the tobacco-flavored consumables for which the FDA had previously issued a marketing granted order. In its assessment, the FDA determined that the three variants of HeatSticks were comparable to the previously authorized tobacco-flavored consumables.Some states and municipalities in the U.S. have introduced severe restrictions for the sale of certain e-cigarettes and tobacco products, including those authorized by the FDA. We believe that such restrictions on FDA-authorized products will not advance public health and will unreasonably limit adult consumer access to products that are shown to be a better alternative to continued cigarette smoking.In March 2020, the FDA issued a final rule to require new text and graphic health warnings on cigarette packs and advertisements. HTPs are technically covered by this rule, however the FDA stated that it would make product-specific decisions about health warnings when issuing or revising individual product or marketing orders. This approach would be consistent with the original marketing order granted for Heatsticks where the FDA required Philip Morris Products S.A. to remove the Surgeon General’s health warning for carbon monoxide from its packaging and advertising, and to use a nicotine addiction health warning instead. Philip Morris Products S.A. is committed to providing adult consumers with complete, accurate, and non-misleading information about possible health risks associated with its products. We have shared our views with the FDA on the application of the new warnings to our HTPs. The final rule is the subject of litigation in the U.S. and was vacated nationwide by a federal court in November 2022. Philip Morris Products S.A. is not a party to this litigation. On March 8, 2023, the FDA proposed new requirements for tobacco product manufacturers regarding the manufacture, design, packing and storage of their products. The FDA stated that these proposed requirements would help protect public health by, among other things, minimizing or preventing contamination and limiting additional risks by ensuring product consistency. The FDA held a public hearing on April 12, 2023, to gather additional comments from stakeholders, including the industry, the scientific community, advocacy groups, and the public. The proposed rule has also been made available for public comment for 180 days. The FDA will review all comments as part of the rulemaking process for this rule. PMI welcomes the FDA’s rule under section 906(e) of the FD&C Act and plans to share its views with the FDA on this important foundational rule. FDA actions may influence the regulatory approach of other governments and regulatory agencies.Currently, national standards in certain countries set minimum quality and safety requirements for heat-not-burn products with technical heat-not-burn specifications and/or methods for demonstrating the absence of combustion. These standards are mandatory in Bahrain, Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Tajikistan, Tunisia, the UAE and Uzbekistan, and voluntary in Armenia, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Morocco, the Philippines, Russia, Vietnam, the U.K. and Ukraine. In Japan, a voluntary standard sets minimum safety requirements for tobacco heating devices. For e-vapor products (e-cigarettes) national standards setting minimum quality and safety requirements have been adopted in several markets.  These standards are mandatory in Armenia, Bahrain, China, Egypt, Jordan, New Zealand, United Arab Emirates, and Saudi Arabia, and voluntary in Costa Rica, France, Kazakhstan, the Philippines, Russia, the U.K. and Ukraine.Currently, industry standards setting minimum quality and safety requirements for tobacco-free oral nicotine products (nicotine pouches) have been adopted in the U.K. and Sweden.  Both standards are voluntary. We expect other governments to consider similar product standards for all novel tobacco and nicotine-containing products and encourage making them mandatory.All EU member states have transposed the EU TPD, including the provisions on novel tobacco products, such as heated tobacco units, and e-cigarettes. Most of the EU member states require a notification submitted six months before the intended placing on the market of such products, while some require pre-market authorizations for the introduction of such products. To date, we have filed a comprehensive dossier summarizing our scientific assessment of our Platform 1 product in over 20 member states.  On March 23, 2023, the Greek Ministry of Health ("MoH") authorized a claim for IQOS with HEETS AMBER to inform Greek IQOS users about reduction in emissions of toxicants when using such product compared to cigarette smoking. The decision authorized the following claim: “The concentration of chemical substances with recognized toxicity produced when using IQOS with HEETS AMBER tobacco sticks is lower compared to conventional smoking. A reduction in the concentration of chemical substances with recognized toxicity does not mean a corresponding reduction in risk for health. The aerosol of this tobacco product contains nicotine and other hazardous chemicals. This tobacco product harms your health and is addictive. The best choice is to quit tobacco and nicotine use altogether.” With this authorization, Greece is the second country officially recognizing the reduction in level of toxicants in the IQOS aerosol compared to cigarette smoke.On September 12, 2022, Norway rejected a submission for authorization of HEETS as a novel tobacco product. Norway partially transposed the EU TPD under the European Free Trade Association agreement and introduced an authorization system for novel tobacco products following Article 19 of TPD. To date, Norway has not granted authorization of any novel tobacco product, and e-cigarettes and tobacco free nicotine pouches have not been granted access, either.In addition, in April 2018, we submitted an application in Italy for HEETS, used with the IQOS device, requesting regulatory recognition of the reduction of toxic substances and potential risk reduction resulting from switching to this product compared to continued cigarette smoking. In January 2019, our application was not granted primarily on the grounds of insufficient data and questions of methodology.  Due to the constraints of the review process, we were unable to supplement the application with all the data filed with the FDA and to address methodological questions during the review. We plan to submit a new application wherein we will clarify the concerns raised by the January 2019 decision and further strengthen our application by submitting additional evidence generated since our initial application, consistent with our FDA filings. We are confident that our evidence supports our new application.On October 31, 2019, our Australian subsidiary, Philip Morris Limited (“PML”), submitted an application to the Scheduling Committee of the Therapeutic Goods Administration of Australia (“TGA”) seeking to exempt HTPs from being prohibited in Australia. In August 2020, the TGA issued its decision denying the application and stating that the application did not present compelling evidence to establish a public health benefit from greater access to nicotine in HTPs.   To date, several governmental agencies have published their scientific findings that analyze the harm-reduction potential of certain RRPs versus continuing to smoke cigarettes, including:In December 2017, at the request of the U.K. Department of Health and Public Health England, the U.K. Committee on Toxicity published its assessment of the risk of heat-not-burn products relative to cigarette smoking.  This assessment included analysis of scientific data for two heat-not-burn products, one of which was our Platform 1 product.  The assessment concluded that, while still harmful to health, compared with the known risks from cigarettes, heat-not-burn products are probably less harmful. Subsequently, in February 2018, Public Health England published a report stating that the available evidence suggests that heat-not-burn products may be considerably less harmful than cigarettes but more harmful than e-cigarettes. In May 2018, the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment (“BfR”) published a study on the Platform 1 aerosol relative to cigarette smoke using the Health Canada Intense Smoking Regimen. BfR found reductions in selected HPHCs in a range of 80-99%.  This publication indicates that significant reductions in the levels of selected toxicants are likely to reduce toxicant exposure, which BfR stated might be regarded as a discrete benefit compared to combustible cigarettes.In May 2018, the Dutch National Institute for Public Health and Environment (“RIVM”) published a factsheet on novel tobacco products that heat rather than burn tobacco, focusing on our Platform 1 product.  RIVM analyzed the aerosol generated by our Platform 1 product and concluded that the use of this product, while still harmful to health, is probably less harmful than continuing to smoke cigarettes.  In June 2018, the Korean Food and Drug Administration (“KFDA”) issued a statement on products that heat rather than burn tobacco.  The KFDA tested three heat-not-burn products, one of which was our Platform 1 product. The  KFDA confirmed that the levels of the nine HPHCs tested in the aerosol of these products were on average approximately 90% lower compared to those measured in the cigarette smoke of the top five cigarette brands in South Korea. However, the KFDA stated that it could not establish that the tested heat-not-burn products are less harmful than cigarettes. In October 2018, our Korean subsidiary filed a request with a local court seeking information underlying KFDA’s analysis, conclusions and public statements. In May 2020, the court ordered KFDA to produce certain records. Subsequent to that decision, and after exchanges between the parties, the case was closed.In August 2018, the Science & Technology Committee of the U.K. House of Commons published a report of its inquiry into e-cigarettes and heat-not-burn products. The report concluded that e-cigarettes are significantly less harmful to health than smoking tobacco.  The report also observed that for those smokers who do not accept e-cigarettes, heat-not-burn products may offer a public health benefit despite their relative risk.  The report called for a risk-proportionate regulatory environment for both e-cigarettes and heat-not-burn products and noted that e-cigarettes should remain the least taxed, cigarettes the most taxed, with heat-not-burn products falling between the two.  The U.K. Committee on Advertising Practice announced the removal of a  prohibition of health claims in the advertising of e-cigarettes in the U.K., effective November 2018.In November 2018, the Eurasian Economic Commission (regulatory body of the Eurasian Union consisting of Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Russia) published the results of its commissioned study on novel nicotine-containing products, including our Platform 1 product. The study confirms significantly lower levels of HPHCs in the aerosol generated by this product compared to cigarette smoke.In January 2019, scientific media published the results of the study of the China National Tobacco Quality Supervision and Test Centre (“CNTQST”) comparing the aerosol generated by our Platform 1 product with cigarette smoke. The CNTQST found that the former contained fewer, and lower levels of, harmful constituents than the latter and concluded that the lower temperature of heating tobacco in our Platform 1 product contributed to the difference. The CNTQST stated that the reduction in emissions of harmful constituents cannot be interpreted as a harm/risk reduction for cigarette smokers in the same proportion.In April 2020, the Superior Health Council of Belgium (“SHC”) published results of its inquiry into heat-not-burn products. The SHC concluded that heat-not-burn products, while not safe, have a more favorable toxicity profile than cigarettes.  However, in light of the uncertainty of such products’ short and long-term impacts, the toxic effects of the dual use with cigarettes, and the existence of approved smoking cessation tools, the SHC recommended that current regulations for cigarettes should apply to heat-not-burn products.In June 2022, the SHC published new advice on e-cigarettes in which they confirm that e-cigarettes are substantially less harmful than smoking cigarettes and, therefore, a better alternative for smokers. The SHC underlines that the vast majority of the risks of tobacco smoking are not caused by nicotine, but by the harmful substances that are released by the combustion of tobacco. Based on the cited science, the SHC calls for legislation that makes a clear distinction between cigarettes and e-cigarettes by focusing on better informing smokers about the benefits of the lower-risk (but not risk-free) alternative, as well as on protecting non-smokers and young people.The foregoing scientific findings of government agencies may not be indicative of the measures that the relevant government authorities could take in regulating our products.We make our scientific findings publicly available for scrutiny and peer review through several channels, including our websites. From time to time, adult consumers, competitors, members of the scientific community, and others inquire into our scientific methodologies, challenge our scientific conclusions or request further study of certain aspects of our RRPs and their health effects. We are committed to a robust and open scientific debate and believe that such debate should be based on accurate and reliable scientific information. We seek to provide accurate and reliable scientific information about our RRPs; nonetheless, we may not be able to prevent third-party dissemination of false, misleading or unsubstantiated information about these products.  The dissemination of scientifically unsubstantiated information or studies with a strong confirmation bias by third parties may cause confusion among adult smokers and affect their decision to switch to better alternatives to continued smoking, such as our RRPs.To date, we have been largely successful in demonstrating to regulators that our heated tobacco units are not cigarettes due to the absence of combustion, and as such, they are generally taxed either as a separate category or as other tobacco products, which typically yields more favorable tax rates than cigarettes. Although we believe that this is sensible from the public health perspective, we cannot guarantee that regulators will continue this approach. There can be no assurance that we will succeed in our efforts to replace cigarettes with RRPs or that regulation will allow us to commercialize RRPs in all markets, to communicate about our RRPs, including making scientifically substantiated risk-reduction claims, or to treat RRPs differently from cigarettes. Legal Challenges to RRPs: We face various administrative and legal challenges related to certain RRP activities, including allegations concerning product classification, advertising restrictions, corporate communications, product coach activities, scientific substantiation, product liability, and unfair competition.  While we design our programs to comply with relevant regulations, we expect these or similar challenges to continue as we expand our efforts to commercialize RRPs and to communicate with the public. The outcomes of these matters may affect our RRP commercialization and public communication activities and performance in one or more markets. In April 2020, affiliates of British American Tobacco plc ("BAT") filed a complaint against PMI, Philip Morris Products S.A., Altria Group, Inc., and its subsidiaries before the International Trade Commission ("ITC"). On September 29, 2021, the ITC issued its Final Determination ("FD"), Limited Exclusion Order ("LEO") and Cease and Desist Order ("CDO").  The ITC upheld the finding of infringement in the FD and found a subsequent violation.  The ITC issued a LEO against Philip Morris Products S.A., prohibiting the importation of infringing tobacco heating articles and components thereof, and CDOs against Altria Client Services, LLC, and certain its affiliates, which went into effect at the end of the 60-day Presidential review period on November 28, 2021.  We have appealed the patent issues.  Furthermore, lawsuits based on the same patent families have been repeatedly and universally rejected in European courts and the European Patent Office.  The decision has no bearing outside the United States. For further details, see Note 10. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements.  Our RRP Business Development Initiatives: In December 2013, we established a strategic framework with Altria Group, Inc. (“Altria”) setting out terms on how the parties would collaborate to develop and commercialize e-vapor products and commercialize two of our RRPs in the U.S. In late 2018, Altria announced that it will participate in the e-vapor category only through another e-vapor company in which Altria acquired a minority interest. In September 2019, Altria's subsidiary, Philip Morris USA Inc. (“PM USA”), began commercialization of a version of our Platform 1 product in the U.S. Under the agreement, PM USA was required to achieve certain milestones in order to maintain its exclusive distribution right and additional milestones in order to extend the agreement after the initial 5-year term. On October 20, 2022, PMI announced that it had reached an agreement with Altria to terminate the companies' commercial relationship covering IQOS in the U.S., as of April 30, 2024. Thereafter, PMI will have the full rights to commercialize IQOS in the U.S. For more details, see Note 2. Acquisitions and Note 10. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements.In January 2020, we announced an agreement with KT&G, a leading tobacco and nicotine company in South Korea, for the commercialization of KT&G’s smoke-free products outside of South Korea on an exclusive basis. On January 30, 2023, we announced a renewal and extension of this arrangement. For more information, see Acquisitions and Other Business Arrangements below.Other Developments: In September 2017, we announced our support of the Foundation for a Smoke-Free World. In September 2020, our pledge agreement with the Foundation was amended. We contributed $45 million in 2020, $40 million in 2021, $17.5 million in 2022, and expect to contribute up to $35 million annually from 2023 through 2029, as specified in the amended pledge agreement. To date, we contributed a total of $267 million. The Foundation is an independent body and is governed by its independent Board of Directors.  The Foundation’s role, as set out in its corporate charter, includes funding research in the field of tobacco harm reduction, encouraging measures that reduce the harm caused by smoking, and assessing the effect of reduced cigarette consumption on the industry value chain.
From time to time, we are subject to governmental investigations on a range of matters, including tax, customs, antitrust, advertising, and labor practices.  We describe certain matters pending in Russia, South Korea and Thailand in Note 10. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements.In November 2010, a World Trade Organization ("WTO") panel issued its decision in a dispute between the Philippines and Thailand, concerning a series of Thai customs and tax measures affecting cigarettes imported by Philip Morris (Thailand) Limited ("PM Thailand") into Thailand (see Note 10. Contingencies for additional information). The decision concluded that Thailand had no basis to find that PM Thailand's declared customs values and taxes paid were too low, as alleged by the Thai government, and created obligations for Thailand to revise its laws, regulations, or practices affecting the customs valuation and tax treatment of future cigarette imports.  Thailand agreed to fully comply with the decision, but the Philippines asserts that to date, Thailand has not fully complied with the WTO panel decision and commenced challenges at the WTO Appellate Body. The WTO Appellate Body is not operational, and the appeals by Thailand are suspended indefinitely. In December 2020, the Philippines and Thailand agreed to pursue facilitator-assisted discussions aimed at progressing and resolving outstanding issues and the countries have since agreed to seek the establishment of a bilateral consultative mechanism, with the goal of reaching a comprehensive settlement of their dispute, consistent with their rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement, as well as the recommendations and rulings of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.The Public Prosecutor’s office of Rome, Italy, notified our Italian subsidiary, Philip Morris Italia S.r.l. (“PM Italia”), as well as three former or current employees and a former external consultant of PM Italia in July 2020 and March 2020, respectively, that it concluded a preliminary investigation against them for alleged contravention of anti-corruption laws and related disruption of trade freedom. The Public Prosecutor alleges that the individuals involved promised certain personal favors to government officials from January to July of 2018 in exchange for favorable treatment for PM Italia, and that PM Italia lacked appropriate organizational controls to prevent the alleged actions by the individuals. BAT has filed a civil claim against PM Italia claiming vicarious liability for any wrongdoing of its former or current employees and seeking EUR 50 million in damages. The court admitted the claim as a matter of course and issued summons for PM Italia to appear as civil party in the case. The next trial hearing is scheduled for May 19, 2023. PM Italia believes the charges brought against it by the Public Prosecutor are without merit and will defend them vigorously.
We discuss asset impairment and exit costs related to restructuring activities in Note 17. Asset Impairment and Exit Costs to our condensed consolidated financial statements.
While, to date, the effect of climate-related laws and regulations on PMI has not been material to our business, results of operations or financial conditions, consideration of environmental and climate-related laws and regulations is an integral aspect of PMI’s climate-related risk assessment process. To this end, we actively monitor the existing and potential impact on PMI of significant pending or existing climate change-related legislation, regulations, international accords, reporting frameworks, standards, principles, and other forms of guidance. Examples include, but are not limited to, the EU Emissions Trading System, the 2015 Paris Climate Agreement, recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures, the SEC’s proposed rules regarding climate-related disclosures, the Taskforce on Nature-related Financial Disclosures, the European Commission Corporate Sustainability Reporting Directive, and the International Sustainability Standards Board proposed standards.
We discuss our acquisitions in Note 2. Acquisitions to our condensed consolidated financial statements.
On January 30, 2023, PMI announced a long-term collaboration with KT&G, South Korea’s leading tobacco and nicotine manufacturer, to continue to commercialize KT&G’s innovative smoke-free devices and consumables on an exclusive, worldwide basis (excluding South Korea).  The agreement covers fifteen years, to January 29, 2038, with performance-review cycles and associated commitments, based on volume, to be confirmed for each three-year period, to allow flexibility for evolving market conditions.The agreement gives PMI continued exclusive access to KT&G’s smoke-free brands and product-innovation pipeline, including offerings for low- and middle-income markets, that will enhance PMI’s existing portfolio of smoke-free products. Products sold under the agreement will be subject to assessment to ensure they meet the regulatory requirements in the markets where they are launched, as well as PMI’s high standards of quality and scientific substantiation. PMI and KT&G will seek any necessary regulatory approvals that may be required on a market-by-market basis.
We discuss our equity investments in Note 14. Related Parties - Equity Investments and Other to our condensed consolidated financial statements.
PMI complies with all applicable trade restrictions and requirements, including sanctions, in the markets in which it operates. We have taken appropriate actions in response to the latest sanctions to ensure full compliance with the relevant restrictions.We are subject to various trade restrictions imposed by the U.S., the EU, Switzerland, the U.K., and other jurisdictions in which we do business (“Trade Sanctions”), including the trade and economic sanctions administered by the U.S. Department of the Treasury's Office of Foreign Assets Control and the U.S. Department of State.  It is our policy to comply fully with these Trade Sanctions.Pursuant to specific exemptions or licenses, or where sanctions do not apply to our business, PMI may make sales in countries subject to Trade Sanctions. We do not do business or sell products in Iran, North Korea or Syria. We sell cigarettes in Cuba under a distribution agreement. These sales are permitted by U.S. law under a License Exception for Agricultural Commodities, issued by the U.S. Department of Commerce (Bureau of Industry and Security), and specifically granted to our distributor. Certain states within the U.S. have enacted legislation permitting or requiring state pension funds to divest or abstain from future investment in stocks of companies that do business with certain countries that are sanctioned by the U.S.  Because we do business in certain of these countries, consistent with our policy to fully comply with Trade Sanctions and as described above, these state pension funds may have divested of our stock or may not invest in our stock. We do not believe such legislation has had a material effect on the price of our shares.PMI is also subject to various Trade Sanctions imposed by the EU and other jurisdictions.  We comply fully with these Trade Sanctions.On June 24, 2021, the EU introduced sanctions regarding Belarus aimed at specific sectors of the Belarus economy, including the tobacco sector.  Subsequently, seven non-EU countries (Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, North Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Albania) announced that they “aligned themselves” with the majority of the EU sanctions. Switzerland and the U.K. have also imposed sanctions  similar in scope to the EU sanctions.On August 9, 2021, the U.S. imposed blocking sanctions on certain Belarusian individuals and entities pursuant to an Executive Order, which expanded the bases for the imposition of sanctions, including, among others, by authorizing the imposition by OFAC of blocking sanctions on persons operating in the tobacco sector of the Belarus economy.  In 2021 and 2022, the U.S., the EU, the U.K., Switzerland and several other jurisdictions supplemented their respective sanctions lists by including additional Belarusian sanctions targets.Following the start of the conflict in Ukraine on February 24, 2022, the U.S., the EU, the UK, Switzerland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea, Japan and other countries introduced extensive economic sanctions and export controls regarding Russia. While the introduced sanctions slightly vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, they are largely aligned. The restrictions are primarily targeted at the Russian financial, banking, oil, military, aviation and marine sectors. The U.S. has also introduced a prohibition on new investment in the Russian Federation by a U.S. person, wherever located. Among sanctions targets are Russian political figures and military personnel, certain oligarchs and journalists, and companies operating in the above-mentioned sectors. Export to Russia of certain luxury goods, and goods and technology which might contribute to Russia’s technological enhancement was banned. Seven non-EU countries (Norway, Iceland, Liechtenstein, North Macedonia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, and Albania) announced that they “aligned themselves” with the majority of the EU sanctions. The EU and Switzerland introduced additional trade restrictions banning, among many other goods, the export of certain non-tobacco materials used to produce cigarettes and heated tobacco consumables in Russia as well as related technical assistance and other related services. The EU and Switzerland prohibited import into their territories of certain goods, including cigarettes, among others, which might generate significant revenues for Russia if they originate in Russia or are exported from Russia. In addition, the EU, the UK, Switzerland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Ukraine sanctioned Mr. Igor Kesaev, a non-majority shareholder of Megapolis Distribution B.V.The U.K. banned the export of electronic cigarettes and similar personal electric vaporizing devices to Russia as well as related technical assistance, and financial and brokering services.  Certain countries also banned the delivery of services to Russia, such as information technology consultancy services, accounting and business and management consulting services, most with exceptions for subsidiaries of U.S., E.U., or Swiss owned companies.  Russia introduced certain countermeasures aimed at reducing the effect of Western sanctions. Countermeasures include restrictions on export of certain goods from Russia, including tobacco-related production equipment, restrictions on lending to foreign borrowers, repatriation of dividends and transactions with securities and real estate involving companies from “hostile” countries (i.e., those which introduced sanctions regarding Russia).PMI continues to monitor the development of new sanctions and ensure full compliance.
The following discussion compares operating results within each of our segments for the three months ended March 31, 2023, with the three months ended March 31, 2022.Unless otherwise stated, references to total industry, total market, our shipment volume and our market share performance reflect cigarettes and heated tobacco units.
During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 3.6%, reflecting: unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to lower cigarette and HTU volume (with the latter primarily reflecting the adverse net impact of estimated wholesaler and distributor HTU inventory movements in Germany and Italy, respectively). Pricing variance was slightly favorable, mainly driven by higher combustible tobacco pricing, notably offset by lower HTU (net) pricing (primarily related to Germany due to supplemental excise tax surcharge discussed below).The pricing variance for the full year 2022 and the first quarter of 2023 was negatively impacted by the supplemental excise tax surcharge on heated tobacco units in Germany, which went into effect in 2022. We expect this negative impact to continue.  The legality of the surcharge is currently being assessed in court and the obligation to pay the surcharge is temporarily suspended. PMI currently accounts for the surcharge as a reduction in net revenues and in accrued liabilities in its results. The accrued liability balance will continue to increase with the continuation of the HTU selling activities and in the case of an unfavorable ruling would negatively impact PMI’s future cash provided by operating activities. The favorable ruling would positively impact future PMI’s operating results.Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 18.7%, primarily reflecting: unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to the same factors as for net revenues; higher marketing, administration and research costs (primarily due to inflationary impacts and lower commercial investments in the prior period); higher manufacturing costs (primarily due to inflationary impacts and higher logistics costs).
In the first quarter, the estimated total market for cigarettes and HTUs in the Region increased by 0.6% to 125.4 billion units, reflecting a 13.8% increase for HTUs, partly offset by a 0.7% decline for cigarettes. The increase in the estimated total market was notably driven by Italy (up by 2.7%) and Poland (up by 5.6%), partly offset by France (down by 3.9%) and Germany (down by 1.4%).
In the first quarter, our total cigarette and HTU shipment volume in the Region decreased by 3.6% to 49.3 billion units, mainly due to Germany (down by 11.0%, or by 1.8% excluding the net unfavorable impact of estimated wholesaler inventory movements), Italy (down by 8.7%; or up by 2.2% excluding the net unfavorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements) and Ukraine (down by 26.7%), partly offset by Poland (up by 15.7%).Our estimated HTU adjusted in-market sales volume in the Region increased by approximately 24% in the quarter, reflecting the strong continued growth momentum for IQOS, including in Germany and Italy, with growth of approximately 32% and 21%, respectively.Our HTU share of the total cigarette and HTU market in the Region increased by 0.9 points, despite the adverse impact of estimated wholesaler inventory movements. Excluding such movements, notably in Germany, our adjusted HTU share in the Region increased by 1.7 points. On the same basis, adjusted HTU share for Germany reached 5.3%, an increase of 1.4 points versus the first quarter of 2022 and 0.6 points sequentially versus the fourth quarter.
During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 5.8%, primarily reflecting: a favorable pricing variance, mainly driven by higher combustible tobacco pricing, with HTU pricing also higher; and favorable volume/mix, primarily driven by favorable cigarette mix and higher smoke-free product volume (HTUs and devices), partly offset by lower cigarette volume; These increases were partially offset by the 2023 termination of a distribution arrangement in the Middle East of $80 million (recognized as a reduction in net revenues) and lower fees for certain distribution rights billed to customers in certain markets, both included in "Cost/Other" in the table above.Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 21.7%, primarily reflecting: the termination of a distribution arrangement, as noted for net revenues, charges in 2023 related to asset impairment and exit costs, higher marketing, administration and research costs; unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to lower cigarette volume; higher manufacturing costs (primarily due to inflationary impacts); and the impact of lower fees for certain distribution rights billed to customers in certain markets, as noted for net revenues; partly offset by the favorable pricing variance.
In the first quarter, the estimated total market for cigarettes and HTUs in the Region decreased, reflecting a decline for cigarettes, partly offset by an increase for HTUs. The decrease in the estimated total market was mainly due to Indonesia (down by 6.5%), Pakistan (down by 34.0%) and the Philippines (down by 27.5%), partly offset by Bangladesh (up by 19.5%), India (up by 10.7%) and Turkey (up by 9.5%).
In the first quarter, our total cigarette and HTU shipment volume in the Region decreased by 1.5% to 82.0 billion units, mainly due to Indonesia (down by 5.8%), Pakistan (down by 43.8%) and the Philippines (down by 31.1%), partly offset by Algeria (up by 72.8%) and Turkey (up by 16.4%).
During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 6.5%, reflecting favorable volume/mix, mainly driven by higher HTU volume, partly offset by lower cigarette volume and unfavorable smoke-free product mix (for HTUs and devices). Pricing variance was slightly favorable, driven by higher cigarette and device pricing largely offset by lower HTU (net) pricing (primarily related to Japan).Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 7.7%, mainly reflecting favorable volume/mix, primarily driven by the same factors as for net revenues, and lower manufacturing costs (primarily supply chain costs), partly offset by charges in 2023 related to asset impairment and exit costs.
In the first quarter, the estimated total market for cigarettes and HTUs in the Region, excluding China, increased, reflecting growth for both HTUs and cigarettes. The increase in the estimated total market was mainly driven by Japan (up by 2.7%) and International Duty Free (up by 51.1%).
Our total cigarette and HTU shipment volume in the Region increased by 4.5% to 24.9 billion units, mainly due to Japan (up by 3.8%) and International Duty Free (up by 24.6%).Excluding the net unfavorable impact of estimated distributor inventory movements (notably due to cigarettes in Japan), our total in-market sales for cigarettes and HTUs increased by 9.0%.
During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 2.8%, primarily reflecting a favorable pricing variance, driven by higher combustible tobacco pricing, partly offset by unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to lower cigarette volume and unfavorable cigarette mix.Operating income, excluding currency and acquisitions, decreased by 37.2%, mainly reflecting: higher marketing, administration and research costs (including incremental investments in the U.S. in preparation for smoke-free product commercialization); unfavorable volume/mix, mainly due to the same factors as for net revenues; and higher manufacturing costs; partly offset by the favorable pricing variance.
In the first quarter, the estimated total market for cigarettes and HTUs in the Region, excluding the U.S., increased, primarily reflecting growth for cigarettes. The increase in the estimated total market was mainly driven by Brazil (up by 15.0%), partly offset by Canada (down by 18.1%) and Mexico (down by 6.9%).
In the first quarter, our total cigarette and HTU shipment volume in the Region increased by 0.7% to 15.0 billion units, mainly driven by Brazil (up by 19.7%), partly offset by Mexico (down by 9.2%).
As of November 11, 2022, PMI became the owner of a majority position in Swedish Match and started consolidating Swedish Match operating results. The business operations of our Swedish Match segment are evaluated separately from the geographical segments.
We recorded net revenues of $581 million in the Swedish Match segment for the quarter, with smoke-free products accounting for over 75% of the segment's total net revenues. We recorded operating income of $193 million in the first quarter. This included $50 million related to the amortization of acquired intangibles and $18 million of charges related to an acquisition accounting-related item.
(1) Excluding U.S. chew
For comparison purposes, the following commentaries assumed the inclusion of Swedish Match's first quarter 2022 shipment volume prior to our acquisition, thereby providing the comparability of Swedish March's volume performance between periods. Volume comparisons versus Swedish Match's first quarter 2022 results reflect data sourced from company disclosures, available at www.swedishmatch.com/investors. Swedish Match's total shipment volume for oral products increased by 9.9% versus the company's corresponding shipments of 154.5 million cans in the first quarter of 2022.Nicotine pouch shipment volume increased by 42.9% compared to first-quarter 2022 Swedish Match nicotine pouch shipment volume of 56.6 million cans, mainly driven by 46.7% growth for ZYN in the U.S., which benefited in part from inventory movements, including in California following the December 2022 flavor ban. In Scandinavia, shipment volume for nicotine pouches grew by 16.0%.Shipment volume for snus declined by 15.7% compared to first-quarter 2022 Swedish Match snus shipment volume of 62.3 million cans. The decrease was primarily due to Scandinavia, reflecting the impact of excise tax and price increases (including related inventory movements), as well as broader pressures on consumer spending (particularly with respect to Swedish Match's premium snus portfolio).Swedish Match's moist snuff shipment volume increased by 3.0%, driven by higher market share.Cigar shipment volume increased by 4.2% compared to first-quarter 2022 Swedish Match cigar shipment volume of 457.4 million units, driven by higher share of market in the natural leaf segment.For 2023, we currently expect strong full-year performance for Swedish Match’s existing operations, underpinned by strong shipment volume growth for ZYN in the U.S.
The operating results of PMI’s Vectura Fertin Pharma business are reported in the Wellness and Healthcare segment. The business operations of our Wellness and Healthcare segment are evaluated separately from the geographical segments.
During the quarter, net revenues, excluding currency and acquisitions, increased by 37.9%, notably driven by the favorable impact of phasing for select inhalation products, coupled with higher net revenues for smoking cessation products. The operating loss of $38 million primarily reflected investments in research and development, as well as amortization and impairment of intangibles.
During the first quarter of 2023, net cash used in operating activities was $1.0 billion as compared to $1.1 billion of net cash provided by operating activities in the first quarter of 2022. Excluding unfavorable currency movements of $0.2 billion, the unfavorable variance of $1.8 billion was due primarily to higher working capital requirements.The higher working capital requirements in the first quarter of 2023 as compared with the first quarter of 2022 were primarily due to more cash used in accrued liabilities and other current assets and more cash used for inventory mainly reflecting the timing of excise tax-paid inventory movements primarily related to excise tax increases and timing of the corresponding excise tax payments, partly offset by more cash provided by accounts receivable mainly reflecting the timing of sales and cash collections, as well as higher usage of our factoring arrangements to sell trade receivables.For the full year 2023, we currently expect an operating cash flow of $10 billion to $11 billion at prevailing exchange rates, subject to year-end working capital requirements.
During the first quarter of 2023, net cash used in investing activities increased by $395 million as compared with the first quarter of 2022. This increase was primarily due to the unfavorable movements of $285 million in cash collateral received from financial institutions primarily to secure derivatives designated as net investment hedges of Euro assets and was principally related to changes in exchange rates between the Euro and the U.S. dollar, as well as an increase in other investments. For further detail on our derivatives designated as net investment hedges and other investments, see Note 7. Financial Instruments.Capital expenditures of $279 million during the first three months of 2023 increased by $50 million as compared with the first quarter of 2022.  The 2023 capital expenditures were primarily related to our ongoing investments in smoke-free product manufacturing capacity.  We expect total capital expenditures in 2023 to be approximately $1.3 billion, partly reflecting increased investments behind smoke-free product manufacturing capacity, including for ILUMA and Swedish Match's portfolio.
During the first quarter of 2023, net cash provided by financing activities was $864 million as compared to $701 million of net cash used in financing activities in the first quarter of 2022.  The favorable variance of $1.6 billion was primarily due to higher net borrowings in 2023 reflecting proceeds from long-term debt issuances in 2023 of $5.2 billion and higher net short-term borrowings (primarily commercial paper), partially offset by repayment on the bridge facility related to the Swedish Match acquisition and higher long-term debt repayments. The variance was also due to a favorable comparison resulting from transactions with noncontrolling interests related to our Turkish affiliates (sale of noncontrolling stakes in 2023 compared to purchase of such stakes in 2022) and the suspension of share repurchases, partially offset by payments to acquire remaining issued and outstanding shares in Swedish Match.  For further details on the transactions with noncontrolling interests in our Turkish affiliates and our purchase of remaining Swedish Match shares, see Note 2. Acquisitions.
We define cash and cash equivalents as short-term, highly liquid investments, readily convertible to known amounts of cash that mature within a maximum of three months and have an insignificant risk of change in value due to interest rate or credit risk changes. As a policy, we do not hold any investments in structured or equity-linked products. Our cash and cash equivalents are predominantly held with institutions that have investment-grade long-term credit rating.  As part of our cash management strategy and in order to manage counterparty exposure, we also enter into reverse repurchase agreements. Such agreements are collateralized with government or corporate securities held by a custodial bank and, at maturity, cash is paid back to PMI, and the collateral is returned to the bank.  For the full-year 2022, the activities for such reverse repurchase agreements were not material.  For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we did not enter into such reverse repurchase agreements. We utilize long-term and short-term debt financing, including a commercial paper program that is regularly used to finance ongoing liquidity requirements, as part of our overall cash management strategy.  Our ability to access the capital and credit markets as well as overall dynamics of these markets may impact borrowing costs.  We expect that the combination of our long-term and short-term debt financing, the commercial paper program and the committed credit facilities, coupled with our operating cash flows, will enable us to meet our liquidity requirements.  In August 2021, we published a business transformation-linked financing framework (“Framework”), which integrates PMI's smoke-free transformation into its financing strategy.  The Framework outlines the guidelines that we will follow in issuing business transformation-linked financing instruments in the debt capital and loan markets, which may include public notes offerings, private placements, loans, and other relevant financing instruments.  Credit Ratings – The cost and terms of our financing arrangements as well as our access to commercial paper markets may be affected by applicable credit ratings.  At March 31, 2023, our credit ratings and outlook by major credit rating agencies were as follows:
At March 31, 2023, our committed revolving credit facilities were as follows:
(1) On January 28, 2022, we entered into an agreement, effective February 10, 2022, to amend and extend the term of our $2.0 billion multi-year revolving credit facility, for an additional year covering the period February 11, 2026 to February 10, 2027, in the amount of $1.9 billion.(2) Includes business transformation-linked pricing adjustments that may result in the reduction or increase in both the interest rate and commitment fee under the credit agreement if PMI achieves, or fails to achieve, certain specified targets based on its business transformation goals.(3) On September 20, 2022, we entered into an agreement, effective September 29, 2022, to amend and extend the term of our $2.5 billion multi-year revolving credit facility, for an additional year covering the period September 30, 2026 to September 29, 2027, in the amount of $2.3 billion.At March 31, 2023, there were no borrowings under the committed revolving credit facilities, and the entire committed amounts were available for borrowing. Subject to market conditions, we currently expect to request a further extension of the terms of our $2.5 billion multi-year revolving credit facility for an additional one-year period, in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of the relevant revolving credit facility agreement.All banks participating in our committed revolving credit facilities have an investment-grade long-term credit rating from the credit rating agencies.  We continuously monitor the credit quality of our banking group, and at this time we are not aware of any potential non-performing credit provider.These committed revolving credit facilities do not include any credit rating triggers, material adverse change clauses or any provisions that could require us to post collateral.  We expect to continue to meet our covenants.In addition to the committed revolving credit facilities discussed above, PMI maintains certain short-term credit arrangements, including uncommitted credit lines, to primarily meet working capital needs. These credit arrangements amounted to approximately $3.1 billion at March 31, 2023, and approximately $1.9 billion at December 31, 2022.  Borrowings under these arrangements and other bank loans amounted to $708 million at March 31, 2023, and $295 million at December 31, 2022.
In connection with PMI's all-cash recommended public offer to the shareholders of Swedish Match, on May 11, 2022, PMI entered into a credit agreement relating to a 364-day senior unsecured bridge facility.  The facility provided for borrowings up to an aggregate principal amount of $17 billion, expiring 364 days after the occurrence of certain events unless extended. On June 23, 2022, PMI entered into a €5.5 billion (approximately $5.8 billion at the date of signing) senior unsecured term loan credit agreement consisting of a €3.0 billion (approximately $3.2 billion at the date of signing) tranche expiring three years after the occurrence of certain events and a €2.5 billion (approximately $2.6 billion at the date of signing) tranche expiring on June 23, 2027. In connection with the term loan facility, the aggregate principal amount of commitments under the 364-day senior unsecured bridge facility was reduced from $17 billion to $11 billion.  On November 11, 2022, PMI acquired a controlling interest of 85.87% of the total issued shares in Swedish Match and acquired 94.81% of its outstanding shares as of December 31, 2022. In accordance with the Swedish Companies Act, PMI subsequently exercised its right to compulsorily redeem the remaining shares for which acceptances were not received and obtained legal title to 100% of the shares in Swedish Match on February 17, 2023.PMI borrowed $8.4 billion under the bridge facility by delivering notices of borrowing for advances of $7.9 billion and $0.5 billion on November 7, 2022 and November 10, 2022, respectively. All amounts borrowed under the bridge facility would become due on November 8, 2023 unless prepaid or such maturity date is extended pursuant to the terms of the bridge facility. On November 7, 2022, PMI also delivered notices of borrowing for advances totaling €5.5 billion under the term loan facility, of which €3.0 billion will become due on November 9, 2025 and €2.5 billion will become due on June 23, 2027 unless prepaid pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement. On November 21, 2022 and February 17, 2023, PMI repaid $4.0 billion and $4.4 billion, respectively, under the bridge facility. Effective February 20, 2023, the remaining outstanding commitments under the bridge facility were fully canceled and the bridge facility agreement was terminated in accordance with its terms. As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the €5.5 billion (approximately $6.0 billion) term loan facility was fully drawn and remained outstanding. The proceeds under the bridge facility and the term loan facility were used, directly or indirectly, to finance the acquisition, including, the payment of related fees and expenses. For further details on this acquisition, see Note 2. Acquisitions.Commercial Paper Program – We continue to have access to liquidity in the commercial paper market through programs in place in the U.S. and in Europe having an aggregate issuance capacity of $8.0 billion. At March 31, 2023, we had $4.1 billion of commercial paper outstanding.  At December 31, 2022, we had $0.9 billion commercial paper outstanding.  The average commercial paper balance outstanding during the first three months of 2023 was $3.6 billion. The average commercial paper balance outstanding during 2022 was $3.1 billion.Sale of Accounts Receivable – To mitigate credit risk and enhance cash and liquidity management, we sell trade receivables to unaffiliated financial institutions.  For further details, see Note 15. Sale of Accounts Receivable to our condensed consolidated financial statements.Supply Chain Financing – We engage with unaffiliated global financial institutions that offer a voluntary supply chain financing program to some of our suppliers. For further details, see Note 19. Supply Chain Financing to our condensed consolidated financial statements. Debt – Our total debt was $47.1 billion at March 31, 2023 and $43.1 billion at December 31, 2022. On February 10, 2023, we filed a shelf registration statement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, under which we may from time to time sell debt securities and/or warrants to purchase debt securities over a three-year period. PMI's debt issuances in the first three months of 2023 were as follows:
(a) Interest is payable semi-annually, commencing in August 2023On February 17, 2023, PMI applied a portion of the net proceeds of the debt issuances to prepay $4.4 billion under its bridge facility, which represented all borrowings outstanding under the bridge facility.  The remaining net proceeds of the offering have been or will be used for general corporate purposes.Guarantees – At March 31, 2023, we have guarantees of our own performance, which are primarily related to excise taxes on the shipment of our products. There is no liability in the condensed consolidated financial statements associated with these guarantees. These guarantees have not had, and are not expected to have, a significant impact on PMI’s liquidity.   In October 2020, we guaranteed an obligation for a then equity method investee that was subsequently divested in 2022.  For further details, see Note 10. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements.
We discuss our stock awards as of March 31, 2023 in Note 4. Stock Plans to our condensed consolidated financial statements.  On June 11, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a new share repurchase program of up to $7 billion, with target spending of $5 billion to $7 billion over a three-year period.  On July 22, 2021, we began repurchasing shares under this new share repurchase program.  From July 22, 2021 through March 31, 2022, we repurchased 10.5 million shares of our common stock at a cost of approximately $1.0 billion.  During the first three months of 2022, we repurchased 2.0 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $199 million.  On May 11, 2022, we announced the suspension of our three-year share repurchase program following the recommended public offer to acquire the outstanding shares of Swedish Match from its shareholders. Prior to the suspension of the program, we made no share repurchases during the second quarter of 2022.  We do not currently anticipate restarting our share repurchase program during 2023.Dividends paid in the first three months of 2023 were $2.0 billion.  During the third quarter of 2022, our Board of Directors approved a 1.6% increase in the quarterly dividend to $1.27 per common share.  As a result, the present annualized dividend rate is $5.08 per common share.
Counterparty Risk - We predominantly work with financial institutions with strong short- and long-term credit ratings as assigned by Standard & Poor’s and Moody’s. These banks are also part of a defined group of relationship banks. Non-investment grade institutions are only used in certain emerging markets to the extent required by local business needs. We have a conservative approach when it comes to choosing financial counterparties and financial instruments. As such, we do not invest or hold investments in any structured or equity-linked products. The majority of our cash and cash equivalents is currently invested with maturities of less than 30 days.We continuously monitor and assess the credit worthiness of all our counterparties.Derivative Financial Instruments - We operate in markets primarily outside of the United States of America, with manufacturing and sales facilities in various locations around the world. Consequently, we use certain financial instruments to manage our foreign currency and interest rate exposure. We use derivative financial instruments principally to reduce our exposure to market risks resulting from fluctuations in foreign exchange and interest rates by creating offsetting exposures. We are not a party to leveraged derivatives and, by policy, do not use derivative financial instruments for speculative purposes.See Note 7. Financial Instruments to our condensed consolidated financial statements for further details on our derivative financial instruments and the related collateral arrangements.
See Note 10. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements for a discussion of contingencies.
We may from time to time make written or oral forward-looking statements, including statements contained in filings with the SEC, in reports to stockholders and in press releases and investor webcasts. You can identify these forward-looking statements by use of words such as "strategy," "expects," "continues," "plans," "anticipates," "believes," "will," "aspires," "estimates," "intends," "projects," "aims," "goals," "targets," "forecasts" and other words of similar meaning. You can also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts.We cannot guarantee that any forward-looking statement will be realized, although we believe we have been prudent in our plans and assumptions. Our RRPs constitute a new product category that is less predictable than our mature cigarette business.  Achievement of future results is subject to risks, uncertainties and inaccurate assumptions. Should known or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, or should underlying assumptions prove inaccurate, actual results could vary materially from those anticipated, estimated or projected. Investors should bear this in mind as they consider forward-looking statements and whether to invest in or remain invested in our securities. In connection with the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we are identifying important factors that, individually or in the aggregate, could cause actual results and outcomes to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements made by us; any such statement is qualified by reference to the following cautionary statements. We elaborate on these and other risks we face throughout this document, particularly in the "Business Environment" section. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all risk factors. Consequently, you should not consider the following to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties. We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statement that we may make from time to time, except in the normal course of our public disclosure obligations.
Our key strategic priorities are to: (i) develop and commercialize products that present less risk of harm to adult smokers who switch to those products versus continued smoking; and (ii) encourage and educate current adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke cigarettes to switch to those RRPs. For our efforts to be successful, we must: •develop RRPs that adult smokers who would otherwise continue to smoke find to be satisfying alternatives to smoking;•for those adult smokers, our goal is to offer RRPs with a scientifically substantiated risk-reduction profile that approaches as closely as possible the risk-reduction profile associated with smoking cessation; •substantiate the reduction of risk for the individual adult smoker and the reduction of harm to the population as a whole, based on scientific evidence of the highest standard that is made available for scrutiny and review by external independent scientists and relevant regulatory bodies; and•advocate for the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs, including the communication of scientifically substantiated information to enable adult smokers to make better choices.We might not succeed in our efforts. If we do not succeed, but others do, or if heat-not-burn products are inequitably regulated compared to other RRP categories without regard to the totality of the scientific evidence available for such products, we may be at a competitive disadvantage. In addition, actions of some market entrants, such as the inappropriate marketing of e-vapor products to youth, as well as alleged health consequences associated with the use of certain e-vapor products, may unfavorably impact public opinion and/or mischaracterize all e-vapor products or other RRPs to consumers, regulators and policy makers without regard to the totality of scientific evidence available for specific products. This may impede our efforts to advocate for the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs. We cannot predict whether regulators will permit the sale and/or marketing of RRPs with scientifically substantiated information and claims. Such restrictions could limit the success of our RRPs. The WHO study group on tobacco product regulation published their eighth report on the scientific basis of tobacco product regulation in May 2021. The report is based on a review of scientific evidence related to novel and emerging nicotine and tobacco products, such as electronic nicotine delivery systems ("ENDS"), electronic non-nicotine delivery systems and HTPs on a number of scientific topics. The report concludes by making a number of policy recommendations on HTPs and ENDS that, if implemented, could restrict both the availability of these products and the access to accurate information about them. In August 2021, the FCTC Secretariat published two reports on novel and emerging tobacco products to the ninth session of the CoP of the FCTC, which are not materially different from the WHO study group report. Substantive decisions based on these reports were deferred to the Tenth Session of the CoP, currently scheduled to take place in the fourth quarter of 2023.  It is not possible to predict whether or to what extent measures recommended by the WHO's reports will be implemented as the reports are not binding to the WHO Member States.Additionally, any claims, regardless of merit, challenging our research and clinical data available to date, may impact the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the commercialization of the RRP category and the commercialization of the RRP category in general.Our RRPs and commercial activities for these products are designed for, and directed toward, current adult smokers and users of nicotine-containing products, and not for non-smokers or youth. We put significant effort to restrict access of our products from non-smokers or youth. Nevertheless, technological, operational, regulatory and/or commercial setbacks might impact the implementation or effectiveness of youth access prevention mechanisms and surrounding infrastructure. If nonetheless there is a significant usage of our products or competitive products among youth or non-smokers, even in situations over which we have no control, our reputation and credibility may suffer, the regulatory approach to our products may become more restrictive, and our efforts to advocate for the development of science-based regulatory frameworks for the development and commercialization of RRPs may be significantly impacted.Moreover, the FDA’s premarket tobacco product and modified risk tobacco product authorizations of two versions of our Platform 1 product are subject to strict marketing, reporting and other requirements. Although we have received these authorizations from the FDA, there is no guarantee that the product will remain authorized for sale in the U.S., or that new versions of the product (Platform 1 or other smoke-free platforms) will receive necessary authorizations, particularly if there is a significant uptake in youth or non-smoker initiation.
Our RRPs are novel products in a new category, and the pace at which adult smokers adopt them may vary, depending on the competitive, regulatory, fiscal and cultural environment, and other factors in a specific market. There may be periods of accelerated growth and periods of slower growth for these products, the timing and drivers of which may be more difficult for us to predict versus our mature cigarette business. The impact of this lower predictability on our projected results for a specific period may be significant, particularly during the early stages of this new product category, during the COVID-19 pandemic as a result of unpredictability due to shortage of key components in our supply chain, or due to geopolitical or macroeconomic events that negatively impact RRP availability or adoption, which in turn may have a material adverse effect on our results of operation.
To date, we have been largely successful in demonstrating to regulators that our RRPs are not cigarettes due to the absence of combustion, and as such they are generally taxed either as a separate category or as other tobacco products, which typically yields more favorable tax rates than cigarettes. Nevertheless, we are unable to predict whether regulators will be issuing new regulations where RRPs will be equally taxed in line with other tobacco products such as ordinary cigarettes. However, if we cease to be successful in these efforts, RRP unit margins may be materially adversely affected, which in turn may have a material adverse effect on our results of operation.
This decline is due to multiple factors, including increased taxes and pricing, governmental actions, the diminishing social acceptance of smoking and health concerns, competition, continuing economic and geopolitical uncertainty, and the continuing prevalence of illicit products. These factors and their potential consequences are discussed more fully below and in the "Business Environment" section in this Form 10-Q. A continuous decline in the consumption of cigarettes could have a material adverse effect on our revenue and profitability, which in turn may have a material adverse effect on our ability to fund our smoke-free transformation.
Tax regimes, including excise taxes, sales taxes and import duties, can disproportionately affect the retail price of cigarettes versus other combustible tobacco products, or disproportionately affect the relative retail price of our cigarette brands versus cigarette brands manufactured by certain of our competitors. Because our portfolio is weighted toward the premium-price cigarette category, tax regimes based on sales price can place us at a competitive disadvantage in certain markets. Furthermore, our volume and profitability may be adversely affected in these markets.In addition, increases in cigarette taxes are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on our sales of cigarettes, due to resulting lower consumption levels, a shift in sales from manufactured cigarettes to other combustible tobacco products and from the premium-price to the mid-price or low-price cigarette categories, where we may be under-represented, from local sales to cross-border purchases of lower price products, or to illicit products such as contraband, counterfeit and "illicit whites."Each of these risks could have a material adverse effect on our business, operations, results of operations, revenues, cash flow and profitability.
Governmental actions, combined with the diminishing social acceptance of smoking and private actions to restrict smoking, have resulted in reduced industry volumes for our products in many of our markets, and we expect that such factors will continue to reduce consumption levels and will increase down-trading and the risk of counterfeiting, contraband, "illicit whites" and cross-border purchases. Significant regulatory developments will continue to take place over the next few years in most of our markets, driven principally by the FCTC. Since it came into force in 2005, the FCTC has led to increased efforts by tobacco control advocates and public health organizations to promote increasingly restrictive regulatory measures on the marketing and sale of tobacco products to adult smokers. Regulatory initiatives that have been proposed, introduced or enacted by governmental authorities in various jurisdictions include:•restrictions on or licensing of outlets permitted to sell cigarettes;•the levying of substantial and increasing tax and duty charges;•restrictions or bans on advertising, marketing and sponsorship;•the display of larger health warnings, graphic health warnings and other labeling requirements;
•restrictions in terms of importing or exporting our products impacting our logistics activities and ability to ship our products;•encouraging litigation against tobacco companies; and•excluding tobacco companies from transparent public dialogue regarding public health and other policy matters.Our financial results could be materially affected by regulatory initiatives resulting in a significant decrease in demand for our brands.  More specifically, requirements that lead to a commoditization of tobacco products or impede adult consumers' ability to convert to our RRPs, as well as any significant increase in the cost of complying with new regulatory requirements, could have a material adverse effect on our financial results.
We are subject to income tax laws in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Changes in the U.S. tax system, including significant increases in the U.S. corporate income tax rate and the minimum tax rate on certain earnings of foreign subsidiaries could be enacted. Such changes could have a material adverse impact on our effective tax rate thereby reducing our net earnings.  Further changes in the tax laws of foreign jurisdictions could arise as a result of the base erosion and profit shifting project undertaken by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, which recommended changes to numerous long-standing tax principles. If implemented, such changes, as well as changes in taxing jurisdictions’ administrative interpretations, decisions, policies, or positions, could also have a material adverse impact on our effective tax rate thereby reducing our net earnings. In future periods, our ability to recover deferred tax assets could be subject to additional uncertainty as a result of such developments. Furthermore, changes in the earnings mix or applicable foreign tax laws may result in significant variability in our effective tax rates. As a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, certain taxing jurisdictions, including the U.S., have proposed punitive tax legislation applicable to companies doing business in Russia, which could also have a material adverse impact on our effective tax rate if enacted, thereby reducing our net earnings. Because we are a U.S. holding company, our most significant source of funds is distributions from our non-U.S. subsidiaries. Certain countries in which we operate have adopted or could institute currency exchange controls and other regulations that limit or prohibit our local subsidiaries' ability to convert local currency into U.S. dollars or to make payments outside the country. This could subject us to the risks of local currency devaluation and business disruption.
In 2022, Russia accounted for around 9% of our total cigarette and heated tobacco unit shipment volume, and around 7% of our total net revenues. Ukraine accounted for around 2% of our total cigarette and heated tobacco unit shipment volume, and around 1% of our total net revenues. Historically, we also produced finished goods in Ukraine for export and manufactured products in Russia. In 2022, as a result of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, we suspended planned investments and scaled down our manufacturing operations in Russia. The short and long-term implications of the Russian invasion of Ukraine for our operations in those countries are impossible to predict at this time. The likelihood of retaliatory action by the Russian government against companies, including PMI, as a result of actions and statements made in response to the Russian invasion, including the possibility of legal action against us or our employees or nationalization of foreign businesses or assets, including cash reserves held in Russia and intangible assets such as trademarks, is impossible to predict. We are continuously assessing the evolving situation in  Russia, including recent regulatory constraints in the market entailing very complex terms and conditions that must be met for any divestment transaction to be granted approval by the authorities; and restrictions resulting from international regulations. In Ukraine, there is no way to know when and to what extent we will be able to fully normalize our operations or to what extent our workforce, facilities, inventory, and other assets will remain intact. These developments have and will continue to have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position, and may result in impairment charges. The conflict also continues to elevate the likelihood of supply chain disruptions, both in the region and globally, and may inhibit our ability to timely source materials and services needed to make and sell our products. For example, historically we sourced certain finished goods, production materials and components from both Russia and Ukraine, including printed materials and filters, and the invasion has, and may continue to, disrupt the availability of and impact our supply chain for these materials. These disruptions, to the extent we are unable to find alternative sources or otherwise address these supply constraints, may impact the availability and cost of our products in other markets, which would adversely impact our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position, and may result in impairment charges. Furthermore, the imposition of various restrictions on transactions with parties from certain jurisdictions, the ban on exports of various products, and other economic and financial restrictions may adversely affect certain third parties with which we do business in Russia, such as customers, suppliers, intermediaries, service providers and banks.The broader consequences of the invasion are also impossible to predict, but could include reputational consequences, further sanctions, financial or currency restrictions, punitive tax law changes, embargoes, regional instability, and geopolitical shifts, as well as adverse effects on macroeconomic conditions, security conditions, currency exchange rates, and financial markets. Given the nature of our business and global operations, such geopolitical instability and uncertainty could increase the costs of our materials and operations; reduce demand for our products; have a negative impact on our supply chains, manufacturing capabilities, or distribution capabilities; increase our exposure to currency fluctuations; constrain our liquidity or our ability to access capital markets; create staffing or operations difficulties; or subject us to increased cyber-attacks. While we will continue to monitor this fluid situation and develop contingency plans as necessary to address any disruptions to our business operations as they develop, the extent of the conflict’s effect on our business and results of operations as well as the global economy, cannot be predicted.The conflict may also have the effect of heightening many other risks disclosed in this Form 10-Q, any of which could adversely affect our business, results of operations, cash flows or financial position. Such risks could affect, without limitation, the achievement of our strategic priorities, including achievement of our RRP growth targets; the availability of third-party manufacturing resources; the availability of attractive acquisition and strategic business opportunities and our ability to fully realize the benefits of these transactions; our ability to attract, motivate, and retain the best global talent; and our loss of revenue from counterfeiting and similar illicit activities.
We increasingly rely on third-parties and their subcontractors/suppliers, sometimes concentrated in a specific geographic area, for product distribution and to manufacture some of our products and product parts (particularly, the electronic devices and accessories), as well as to provide services, including to support our finance, commercialization and information technology processes. While many of these arrangements improve efficiencies and decrease our operating costs, they also diminish our direct control.  Such diminished control may lead to disruption in the distribution of our products and may have a material adverse effect on the quality and availability of products or services, our supply chain, and the speed and flexibility in our response to changing market conditions and adult consumer preferences, all of which may place us at a competitive disadvantage.   In addition, we may be unable to renew these agreements on satisfactory terms for numerous reasons, including government regulations, and our costs may increase significantly if we must replace such third parties with other partners or our own resources.
While we seek to mitigate our business risks associated with climate change by establishing environmental goals and standards and seeking business partners, including within our supply chain, that are committed to operating in ways that protect the environment or mitigate environmental impacts, we recognize that there are inherent climate-related risks wherever business is conducted. Among other potential impacts, climate change could influence the quality and volume of the agricultural products we rely on, including tobacco, due to a number of factors beyond our control, including more frequent variations in weather patterns, extreme weather events causing unexpected downtime and inventory losses, other adverse weather conditions, and governmental restrictions on trade, all of which may lead to disruption of operations at factories, warehouses and other premises. Furthermore, risks related to natural ecosystems degradation, decreased agricultural productivity in certain regions of the world, biodiversity loss, water resource depletion and deforestation, which are partially driven or exacerbated by climate change, may disrupt our business operations or those of our suppliers and business partners.There is an increased focus by foreign, federal, state and local regulatory and legislative bodies regarding environmental policies relating to climate change. New climate-related legal or regulatory requirements may lead to additional carbon taxation, energy price increases, new compliance costs, increased distribution and supply chain costs, and other expenses impacting our cost of operation. Even if we make changes to align ourselves with legal or regulatory requirements, we may still be subject to significant penalties if such laws or regulations are interpreted and applied in a manner inconsistent with our practices.
As with other agricultural commodities, the price of tobacco leaf and cloves can be influenced by imbalances in supply and demand and the impacts of natural disasters and pandemics such as COVID-19. Tobacco production in certain countries is subject to a variety of controls, including government mandated prices and production control programs. Changes in the patterns of demand for agricultural products could cause farmers to produce less tobacco or cloves. Any significant change in tobacco leaf and clove prices, quality and quantity could affect our profitability and our business.
Some of the countries in which we operate face the threat of civil unrest and can be subject to regime changes. In others, nationalization, terrorism, conflict and the threats of war or acts of war may have a significant impact on the business environment. Natural disasters, extreme weather events, pandemics, economic, political, regulatory, acts of war or threats of war, or other developments could disrupt or increase the expenses related to our supply chain, manufacturing capabilities,  distribution capabilities, or the energy and other utility services required to operate our factories, warehouses, and other premises. Our business continuity plans and other safeguards might not always be effective to fully mitigate their impact. In addition, such developments – including the impact on energy prices and availability in the EU and elsewhere resulting from the invasion of Ukraine by Russia – could increase costs of our materials and operations and lead to loss of property or equipment that are critical to our business in certain markets and difficulty in staffing and managing our operations, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our operations, volumes, revenue, net earnings and profitability. We discuss additional risks associated with Russia's invasion of Ukraine and climate change, above, and with the COVID-19 pandemic, below.In certain markets, we are dependent on governmental approvals of various actions such as price changes, and failure to obtain such approvals could impair growth of our profitability.In addition, despite our high ethical standards and rigorous controls and compliance policies aimed at preventing and detecting unlawful conduct, given the breadth and scope of our international operations, we may not be able to detect all potential improper or unlawful conduct by our employees and partners. Such improper or unlawful conduct (actual or alleged) could lead to litigation and regulatory action, cause damage to our reputation and that of our brands, and result in substantial costs.
We conduct our business primarily in local currency and, for purposes of financial reporting, the local currency results are translated into U.S. dollars based on average exchange rates prevailing during a reporting period. Foreign currencies may fluctuate significantly against the U.S. dollar reducing our net revenues, operating income and EPS.  Our primary local currency cost bases may be different from our primary currency revenue markets, and U.S. dollar fluctuations against various currencies may have disproportionate negative impact on net revenues as compared to our gross profit and operating income margins.
Increasing inflationary pressures may result in significant increases to our expenses, including direct materials, wages, energy, and transportation costs. While we take actions, wherever possible, to reduce the impact of the effects of inflation, in cases of sustained and elevated inflation across several of our major markets, it may be difficult to effectively control the increases to our costs. Increased inflation also has and may continue to lead to interest rate increases, thereby increasing our interest expense. Increasing inflationary pressures may also negatively impact consumer purchasing power, which could result in reduced demand for our products. If we are unable to increase our prices or take other actions to mitigate the effect of increasing inflationary pressures, our profitability and financial position could be negatively impacted.
There is litigation related to tobacco products pending in certain jurisdictions in which we operate. Damages claimed in some tobacco-related litigation are significant and, in certain cases in Brazil, Canada, and Nigeria, range into the billions of U.S. dollars. We anticipate that new cases will continue to be filed. The FCTC encourages litigation against tobacco product manufacturers. It is possible that our consolidated results of operations, cash flows or financial position could be materially adversely affected in a particular fiscal quarter or fiscal year by an unfavorable outcome or settlement of certain pending litigation. We face various administrative and legal challenges related to certain RRP activities, including allegations concerning product classification, advertising restrictions, corporate communications, product coach activities, scientific substantiation, product liability, antitrust, and unfair competition.  While we design our programs to comply with relevant regulations, we expect these or similar challenges to continue as we expand our efforts to commercialize RRPs and to communicate with the public. The outcomes of these matters may affect our RRP commercialization and public communication activities and performance in one or more markets. Also, see Note 10. Contingencies to our condensed consolidated financial statements for a discussion of pending litigation.
Investigations include allegations of contraband shipments of cigarettes, allegations of unlawful pricing activities within certain markets, allegations of underpayment of income taxes, customs duties and/or excise taxes, allegations of false and misleading usage of descriptors, allegations of unlawful advertising, and allegations of unlawful labor practices. We cannot predict the outcome of those investigations or whether additional investigations may be commenced, and it is possible that our business could be materially adversely affected by an unfavorable outcome of pending or future investigations. See Note 10. Contingencies—Other Litigation to our condensed consolidated financial statements and the “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations—Operating Results by Business Segment—Business Environment—Governmental Investigations” in this Form 10-Q for a description of certain governmental investigations to which we are subject.
Our intellectual property rights are valuable assets, their protection is important to our business, and that protection may not be equally available in every country in which we operate or in which our products are sold.  If the steps we take to protect our intellectual property rights globally, including through applying for, prosecuting, maintaining and enforcing, where relevant, a combination of trademark, design, copyright, patent, trade secrets and other intellectual property rights, are inadequate, or if others infringe or misappropriate our intellectual property rights, notwithstanding legal protection, our business, financial condition, and results of operations could be adversely impacted. Moreover, failing to manage our existing and/or future intellectual property may place us at a competitive disadvantage. Intellectual property rights of third parties may limit our ability to develop, manufacture and/or commercialize our products in one or more markets. Competitors or other third parties may claim that we infringe on their intellectual property rights. Any such claims, regardless of merit, could divert management’s attention; be costly, disruptive, time-consuming and unpredictable and expose us to significant litigation costs and damages; and may impede our ability to develop, manufacture and/or commercialize new RRPs and improve our products, and thus have a material adverse effect on our revenue and our profitability.  In addition, if, as a result, we are unable to manufacture or sell our RRPs or improve their quality in one or more markets, our ability to convert adult smokers to our RRPs in such markets would be adversely affected. See Note 10. Contingencies— Other Litigation to our condensed consolidated financial statements for a description of certain intellectual property proceedings.
We are subject to highly competitive conditions in all aspects of our business.  We compete primarily on the basis of product quality, brand recognition, brand loyalty, taste, R&D, innovation, packaging, customer service, marketing, advertising and retail price and, increasingly, adult smoker willingness to convert to our RRPs. The competitive environment and our competitive position can be significantly influenced by weak economic conditions, erosion of consumer confidence, competitors' introduction of lower-price products or innovative products, novel products which given their taste characteristics may be more commercially successful, higher tobacco product taxes, higher absolute prices and larger gaps between retail price categories, and product regulation that diminishes the ability to differentiate tobacco products and restricts adult consumer access to truthful and non-misleading information about our RRPs. Competitors in our industry include British American Tobacco plc, Japan Tobacco Inc., Imperial Brands plc, new market entrants, particularly with respect to innovative products, several regional and local tobacco companies and, in some instances, state-owned tobacco enterprises, principally in Algeria, Egypt, China, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam. Some competitors have different profit, volume and regulatory objectives, and some international competitors may be less susceptible than PMI to changes in currency exchange rates.  Certain new market entrants in the non-combustible product category may alienate consumers from innovative products through inappropriate marketing campaigns, messaging and inferior product satisfaction, and without scientific substantiation based on appropriate R&D protocols and standards.  The growing use of digital media could increase the speed and extent of the dissemination of inaccurate and misleading information about our RRPs, all of which could have a material adverse effect on our profitability and results of operations.
Our business is subject to changes in adult consumer preferences, which may be influenced by local economic conditions, accessibility to our products and availability of accurate information related to our products.   To be successful, we must:
In periods of economic uncertainty, adult consumers may tend to purchase low-price brands, and the volume of our premium-price and mid-price brands and our profitability could be materially adversely impacted as a result.  Such down-trading trends may be reinforced by regulation that limits branding, communication and product differentiation.
Our profit growth may be materially adversely impacted if we are unable to introduce new products or enter new markets successfully, to raise prices or to improve the proportion of our sales of higher margin products and in higher margin geographies.
One element of our growth strategy is to expand our brand portfolio and market positions through selective acquisitions and the development of strategic business relationships. Acquisition and strategic business development opportunities are limited and present risks of failing to achieve efficient and effective integration, strategic objectives and/or anticipated revenue improvements and cost savings. There is no assurance that we will be able to acquire attractive businesses or enter into strategic business relationships on favorable terms ahead of our competitors, or that such acquisitions or strategic business development relationships will be accretive to earnings or improve our competitive position. In addition, we may not have a controlling position in certain strategic investments or relationships, which could impact the extent to which the intended financial growth and other benefits from these investments or relationships may ultimately materialize.
To be successful, we must continue transforming our culture and ways of working, align our talent and organizational design with our increasingly complex business needs, and innovate and transform to a consumer-centric business.  We compete for talent, including in areas that are new to us such as digital, information technology, and life sciences, with companies in the consumer products, technology, pharmaceutical and other sectors that enjoy greater societal acceptance. As a result, we may be unable to attract, motivate and retain the best global talent with the right degree of diversity, experience and skills to achieve our strategic goals.
The outbreak of the global COVID-19 pandemic in 2020 has created significant societal and economic disruption, and resulted in the closures of stores, factories and offices, and restrictions on manufacturing, distribution and travel, all of which have and may continue to adversely impact our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial position. Our business continuity plans and other safeguards may not be effective to mitigate the ongoing or potential impact of COVID-19 or other epidemics, endemics, or pandemics.  The production of our RRP portfolio requires various components and materials, and we believe that there is an adequate supply of such components and materials in the world markets to satisfy our current and anticipated production requirements. However, some components and materials necessary for the production of our RRPs, including those for the electronic devices, are obtained from single or limited sources, and can be subject to industry-wide shortages and price fluctuations. While we have been successful in maintaining adequate supply of such components and materials during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the COVID-19 pandemic, or another epidemic, endemic or pandemic, may disrupt that supply, whether through regulatory enforced actions taken to contain its spread or through other supply chain disruptions caused by such epidemic, endemic or pandemic. This could negatively impact the commercialization of our RRPs. Significant risks to our business during an epidemic, endemic or pandemic, such as the ongoing consequences of the COVID-19 outbreak, also include:
The significant adverse effect of an epidemic, endemic or pandemic on the economic or political conditions in markets in which we operate could result in changes to the preferences of our adult consumers and lower demand for our products, particularly for our mid-price or premium-price brands. Each of these risks could have a material adverse effect on our business, operations, results of operations, revenues, cash flow and profitability.
Large quantities of counterfeit cigarettes are sold in the international market. We believe that Marlboro is the most heavily counterfeited international cigarette brand, although we cannot quantify the revenues we lose as a result of this activity. In addition, our revenues are reduced by contraband, cross-border purchases, "illicit whites" and non-tax-paid volume produced by local manufacturers.  Our revenues and consumer satisfaction with our smoke-free products' devices and consumables  may be materially adversely affected by counterfeit products that do not meet our product quality standards and scientific validation procedures.
We and our business partners heavily rely on information technology networks and systems, including those connected to the Internet, to help manage business processes and operations, including the collection, storage, interpretation, and processing of confidential, sensitive, personal and other data; internal and external communications; marketing and e-commerce activities; the manufacture, sale, and distribution of our products; management of third-party business relationships; engagement with governmental authorities; innovation through research and development; and other activities necessary for  business operations. Some of these information systems and networks are developed, supplied, or managed by third-party service providers that may make us vulnerable to “supply chain” style cyberattacks.Cyberattacks, security incidents and vulnerabilities impacting PMI, newly acquired companies, our business partners, or our third-party providers, continue to dynamically evolve in sophistication and volume, making it difficult for us to predict probability, frequency, and impact severity of security incidents. Further, it may be inherently difficult to detect vulnerabilities during due diligence, for long periods of time, or soon enough to mitigate exploitation. There can be no assurance that such security incidents or vulnerabilities will not have a material adverse effect on us in the future.    We continue to make investments in administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to maintain information security protections in line with industry standards and best practices. We evaluate the adequacy of preventative actions to reduce security incidents on an ongoing basis.  Our safeguards may not, however, be effective in mitigating the impact of service disruptions or other failures of these information technology networks and systems. Failure to timely respond and mitigate security incidents could result in wide-ranging business interruptions. Such security incidents could place us at a competitive disadvantage; result in financial impacts, a loss of revenue, assets, including our intellectual property, personal or other sensitive data; result in litigation and regulatory action including significant fines or penalties; impact our operations; cause damage to our reputation and that of our brands; and result in significant remediation and other costs.
An actual or alleged failure to comply with complex and changing privacy, data, artificial intelligence and information security laws and regulations under the EU General Data Protection Regulation, various United States state and federal laws, and other similar privacy and information security laws across the jurisdictions in which PMI operates, such as the failure to protect personal data; implement appropriate technological and reasonable security measures; respect the privacy rights of data subjects; provide sufficient detailed notices of personal data processing; retrieve consent and provide opt-outs; meet stringent timeframe requirements for incident reporting to regulatory authorities; comply with artificial intelligence regulations; and others, could have a material adverse effect on us, subject us to substantial fines and/or legal challenges, and/or harm our business, reputation, financial condition, or operating results. Such laws and regulations across the jurisdictions in which PMI operates may vary, resulting in inconsistent or conflicting legal obligations.
As previously disclosed in this Form 10-Q, since 2021, we  acquired Swedish Match, OtiTopic, Fertin Pharma and Vectura, and  launched Vectura Fertin Pharma, our new Wellness and Healthcare business consolidating OtiTopic, Fertin Pharma and Vectura.
The successful integration of the acquired businesses and their operations into those of our own and our ability to realize the benefits of the Acquisitions are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, many of which are not in our control. The risks and uncertainties relating to integrating the businesses acquired include, among other things: (i) the challenge of integrating complex organizations, systems, operating procedures, industry specific compliance programs, technology, networks and other assets of the businesses that we acquire, and the costs related to such integration efforts; (ii) the possibility that we are unable to gain access to differentiated intellectual property, proprietary technology, and pharmaceutical development expertise as anticipated by these Acquisitions, and thus fail to realize our desired entry into additional smoke-free, wellness, therapeutic and healthcare platforms; (iii) the challenge of integrating the cultures and business practices of each of Swedish Match, Fertin Pharma and Vectura to our culture and business practices, which if not managed correctly, could lead to difficulties in retaining key management and other key employees; and (iv) the challenge of achieving a successful integration as a result of our affiliation to our combustible product portfolio. In addition, even if we are able to successfully integrate, the anticipated benefits of the Acquisitions may not be realized fully, or at all, or may take longer to realize than expected. Furthermore, the success of the Acquisitions also depends on Swedish Match's continued growth in highly competitive markets and on the success of the research and development efforts of Vectura Fertin Pharma, including the ability to obtain regulatory approval for new products, and the ability to commercialize or license these new products developed by them.  Moreover, our combustible product portfolio may stand in the way of introducing and growing new product categories, and may prevent our business from developing a long-term sustainable ecosystem of products in the wellness, therapeutic, and healthcare categories.
The businesses that we have acquired may have liabilities that we were unable to identify, or were unable to discover, in the course of performing our due diligence investigations during the Acquisitions thereof. We cannot assure you that the indemnification available to us under the respective acquisition agreements, will be sufficient in amount, scope or duration to fully offset the possible liabilities associated with the respective business or property that we will assume upon consummation of each Acquisition. Furthermore, the acquisition of Swedish Match was structured as a direct purchase of shares from Swedish Match shareholders and therefore did not include an acquisition agreement or indemnification rights. Any such liabilities, individually or in the aggregate, could have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We have accounted for the completion of the Acquisitions using the acquisition method of accounting. Differences between preliminary estimates and the final acquisition accounting may occur, and these differences could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements and our future results of operations and financial position in combination with the businesses acquired. Furthermore, given the nature of the assets being acquired in the Acquisitions, we may not be able to avoid future impairments of those assets, which may also have a material impact on our future results of operation and financial position.
Our success following these Acquisitions will depend in part upon our ability and the ability of each of Swedish Match and Vectura Fertin Pharma to maintain business relationships. Uncertainty about the effect of the Acquisitions on customers, suppliers, employees and other constituencies of each of Swedish Match, Fertin Pharma and Vectura, may have a material adverse effect on us and/or the businesses that we have acquired through the Acquisitions. Customers, suppliers and others who do business with Swedish Match or Vectura Fertin Pharma may delay or defer business decisions, decide to terminate, modify or renegotiate their relationships, or take other actions as a result of the Acquisitions, which could negatively affect the revenues, earnings and cash flows of our company or the businesses that we have acquired. Regulatory changes may have an impact on the development and/or commercialization of products which originate from the Swedish Match or Vectura Fertin Pharma value chains, as well as our revenues, earnings and cash flow. If we are unable to maintain the business and operational relationships of Swedish Match, or of Vectura Fertin Pharma, our financial position, results of operations or cash flows upon combining with these companies could be adversely affected.