
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes included in this quarterly report. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs, which are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed under the headings “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” in both our annual report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 and in this quarterly report.
We are primarily engaged in the development, manufacture and sale of our proprietary Omnipod System, a continuous insulin delivery system for people with insulin-dependent diabetes. The Omnipod System features a small, lightweight, self-adhesive disposable tubeless Omnipod (the “Pod”) device that the user fills with insulin and wears directly on the body for up to three days at a time, which delivers personalized doses of insulin, and the PDM or Controller, a wireless handheld device that programs the Pod with the user’s personalized insulin-delivery instructions and wirelessly monitors the Pod’s operation. The Omnipod System includes: Classic Omnipod, its next generation Omnipod DASH, and the most recent generation Omnipod 5, all of which eliminate the need for multiple daily injections using syringes or insulin pens or the use of pump and tubing.We have also tailored the Omnipod System technology platform for the delivery of subcutaneous drugs in other therapeutic areas. Most of our drug delivery revenue currently consists of sales of pods to Amgen for use in the Neulasta® Onpro® kit, a delivery system for Amgen’s Neulasta to help reduce the risk of infection after intense chemotherapy.Our long-term financial objective is to sustain profitable growth. To achieve this goal, we launched Omnipod 5 in 2022 in the United States and we are working to bring Omnipod 5 to our international markets. We received CE Mark approval under the European MDR in September 2022, and we are currently focused on further building our international teams and advancing our regulatory, reimbursement, and market development efforts. We plan to launch Omnipod 5 in the U.K. and Germany in 2023 and to continue our international roll out more broadly in 2024.We also have begun enrolling individuals in a pivotal trial for Omnipod 5 with the goal of expanding Omnipod 5’s indication to type 2 users. Additionally, to accelerate our efforts to secure reimbursement for Omnipod 5, we have fully enrolled individuals in a randomized control trial in the U.S. and have enrolled the majority of the individuals in France. We also continue to expand market access and awareness of Omnipod through our direct to consumer advertising programs and through growing our presence in the U.S. pharmacy channel, where access to Omnipod 5 and Omnipod DASH is simpler and affordable, as no up-front investment is required. As we continue our growth in the pharmacy channel, we plan to phase-out our Classic Omnipod in the U.S. in 2023, since the vast majority of our customer base is no longer using this product.We also continue to take steps to strengthen our global manufacturing capabilities. We are currently constructing a new manufacturing plant in Malaysia to support our international expansion strategy, further ensure product supply, and drive higher gross margins over time. We expect to begin production at this new manufacturing facility in 2024.Finally, we continue to focus on our product development efforts, including automated insulin delivery (“AID”) offerings, such as choice of continuous glucose monitor and smartphone integration, and enhancing the customer experience through digital product and data capabilities. In April 2023, we received U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) clearance for Omnipod GOTM, our basal-only Pod for individuals with type 2 diabetes age 18 or older who require insulin. We expect commercialization of this product in 2024.
Our Pods are intended to be used continuously for up to three days, after which it may be replaced with a new disposable Pod. The Omnipod System’s unique patented design allow us to provide pump therapy at a relatively low or no up-front investment in regions where reimbursement allows for it and our pay-as-you-go pricing model reduces the risk to third-party payors. As we grow our customer base, we expect to generate an increasing portion of our revenues through recurring sales of our disposable Pods, which provides recurring revenue. During 2022, we issued two voluntary Medical Device Corrections (“MDCs”), one in October for our Omnipod DASH PDM related to its battery and the other in November for our Omnipod 5 Controller related to its charging port and cable. In addition to the estimated liability we recorded in 2022, we have a performance obligation to replace Omnipod DASH PDMs and Omnipod 5 Controllers sold subsequent to the MDC issuances, which is expected to negatively impact gross margins and net income in 2023, most notably in the first half of the year. However, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, we recorded $8.0 million of income associated with a change in our estimated liability for the MDCs primarily due to lower shipping costs for replacement DASH PDMs and lower expected distribution costs for Omnipod 5 Controllers, which is expected to offset the negative impact to gross margin.We continue to experience challenges stemming from the global supply chain disruption; however, while there is no guarantee of future performance, to date we have been able to successfully mitigate this disruption and ensure uninterrupted supply to our customers by increasing our inventory levels and taking other measures. While our mitigation efforts and inflation are expected to negatively impact gross margins and net income throughout the year, we intend to continue to work to improve productivity to help offset these costs.
(1) Constant currency revenue growth is a non-GAAP financial measure which should be considered supplemental to, and not a substitute for, our reported financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP. See “Management’s Use of Non-GAAP Measures.”Total revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $62.7 million, or 21.2%, to $358.1 million, compared with $295.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Constant currency revenue growth of 23.3% was primarily driven by higher volume and, to a lesser extent, favorable sales channel mix, partially offset by decreased drug delivery revenue.
U.S. Omnipod revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $84.9 million, or 48.8%, to $259.0 million, compared with $174.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. This increase was primarily due to higher volumes driven by growing our customer base and, to a lesser extent, growth through the pharmacy channel, where Pods have a higher average selling price due in part to the fact that we offer the PDM/Controller for no charge. This increase was also driven by conversions to Omnipod 5 as users generally fill both their starter kit and their first month of refills simultaneously. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in inventory days-on-hand at our distributors due to higher-than-expected consumption of Omnipod 5 and sales returns for Omnipod DASH and Omnipod Classic as retail pharmacies convert their inventory to Omnipod 5.U.S. Omnipod revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 includes $96.8 million of related party revenue, compared with $48.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The $48.4 million increase primarily resulted from growth through the pharmacy channel.For full year 2023, we expect strong U.S. Omnipod revenue growth driven by continued volume growth of Omnipod 5 in the pharmacy channel, continued sales of Omnipod DASH, and the benefits of our recurring revenue model. We expect these increases to be partially offset by lower conversions to Omnipod 5 in the second half of the year compared to 2022.
International Omnipod revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $3.2 million, or 3.4%, to $98.6 million, compared with $95.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Excluding the 6.2% unfavorable impact of currency exchange, the remaining 9.6% increase in revenue was primarily due to higher volumes as we continue to expand awareness and access to Omnipod DASH, partially offset by increased competition from AID systems. For full year 2023, we expect higher International Omnipod revenue due to continued volume growth driven by the ongoing adoption of Omnipod DASH, partially offset by competition from AID systems.
Drug Delivery revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was nominal compared with $25.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. For full year 2023, we expect Drug Delivery revenue to decline $26 million to $32 million due to a lower demand forecast from our partner.
Cost of revenue for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $31.9 million, or 37.2%, to $117.6 million, compared with $85.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Gross margin was 67.2% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with 71.0% for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The 380 basis point decrease in gross margin was primarily driven by higher costs associated with Omnipod 5 production, higher production costs in the U.S. as manufacturing continues to ramp and become a larger portion of our total production, and lower production of Drug Delivery pods. To a lesser extent, increased costs associated with warranty, inventory reserves, inflation also contributed to the decline in margin. These decreases were partially offset by higher average selling price due to growth in the pharmacy channel and an approximate 220 basis point adjustment to our estimated warranty accrual for the voluntary MDCs issued in 2022.For full year 2023, we expect gross margin to be in the range of 65% to 66%. We anticipate gross margin to increase due to significant costs associated with the MDCs in 2022, most of which we do not expect to recur in 2023, higher volume in the pharmacy channel and favorable geographical sales mix. We believe these increases will be partially offset by higher production costs as we further scale U.S. manufacturing, unfavorable product line mix due to higher costs associated with Omnipod 5 production, and higher costs as we contend with inflation.
Research and development expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $7 million, or 16.2%, to $50.1 million, compared with $43.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase was primarily due to year-over-year headcount additions to support our continued investment in development of Omnipod products. We expect research and development spending in 2023 to increase compared with 2022 as we continue to invest in advancing our innovation and clinical pipeline and contend with inflation.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased $34.0 million, or 26.4%, to $162.7 million, compared with $128.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase was primarily attributable to higher third-party customer service costs to support Omnipod 5 adoption, year-over-year headcount additions, mainly in information technology and commercial operations, and an increase in software license fees driven by investments in new systems due to our growing business and increased headcount. To a lesser extent, the increase was due to higher consulting costs and higher direct-to-consumer advertising spend.We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in 2023 compared with 2022 primarily due to investments in our operating structure, primarily headcount additions, to facilitate operational efficiencies and continued growth, including customer support and a new enterprise resource planning system. Additionally, we plan to make additional investments to support the Omnipod System, including market acceptance and access, and the phased launch of Omnipod 5 in our international markets. We expect these increases to be partially offset by $25.2 million of legal charges incurred in 2022, related to the settlement of patent infringement lawsuit, associated legal fees, and the settlement of a contract dispute, that are not expected to recur.
Net interest expense decreased $6.0 million to $2.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with $8.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. This decrease was primarily driven by an increase in interest income resulting from higher interest rates.
Income tax expense was $0.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with $1.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022, resulting in relatively consistent effective tax rates of 3.4% and 5.1%, respectively.
The table below presents reconciliations of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”):
(1) Represents income resulting from an adjustment to estimated costs associated with the voluntary MDC notices issued in the fourth quarter of 2022, which is included in cost of revenue. Refer to Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Management uses the following non-GAAP financial measures:Constant currency revenue growth represents the change in revenue between current and prior year periods using the exchange rate in effect during the applicable prior year period. We present constant currency revenue growth because we believe it provides meaningful information regarding our results on a consistent and comparable basis. Management uses this non-GAAP financial measure, in addition to financial measures in accordance with GAAP, to evaluate our operating results. It is also one of the performance metrics that determines management incentive compensation.Adjusted EBITDA represents net income plus net interest expense, income tax expense, depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation and other significant transactions or events, such as legal settlements, medical device corrections, and loss on extinguishment of debt, that affect the period-to-period comparability of our performances, as applicable. We present Adjusted EBITDA because management uses it as a supplemental measure in assessing our performance, and we believe that it is helpful to investors, and other interested parties as a measure of our comparative performance from period to period. Adjusted EBITDA is a commonly used measure in determining business value and we use it internally to report results.  These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered supplemental to, and not a substitute for, our reported financial results prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, the above definitions may differ from similarly titled measures used by others. Non-GAAP financial measures exclude the effect of items that increase or decrease our reported results of operations; accordingly, we strongly encourage investors to review our consolidated financial statements in their entirety.
We believe that our current liquidity as further described below will be sufficient to meet our projected operating, investing and debt service requirements for at least the next twelve months.
The following table contains several key measures to gauge our financial condition and liquidity:
To finance our operations and global expansion, we have periodically issued convertible senior notes, which are convertible into our common stock. As of March 31, 2023, the following notes were outstanding:
(1) Per $1,000 face value of notesAdditional information regarding our debt is provided in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
We have a $100.0 million three-year senior secured revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”), which expires in 2024. At March 31, 2023, no amount was outstanding under the Credit Facility. The Credit Facility contains a covenant to maintain a specified leverage ratio under certain conditions when there are amounts outstanding under the facility. It also contains other customary covenants, none of which are considered restrictive to our operations.
In May 2023, the Company entered into a $24 million financing transaction for manufacturing equipment in Acton, Massachusetts.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $0.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily attributable to $56.0 million working capital cash outflow, partially offset by net income, as adjusted for depreciation and amortization, and stock-based compensation expense. The working capital outflow was driven by a $36.5 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities, a $38.2 million increase in inventories, a $20.7 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets and a $12.1 million increase in accounts receivable, partially offset by a $51.5 million increase in accounts payable. The decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities was primarily driven by the annual payout of cash bonuses for performance in the prior year and warranty fulfillment associated with the DASH voluntary MDC issued in 2022, partially offset by an increase in accrued rebates mainly due to revenue growth in the pharmacy channel. The increase in inventories was primarily driven by a planned inventory build to satisfy demand. The increase in prepaid expenses and other assets was primarily driven by prepayments for inventory associated with the Omnipod 5 voluntary MDC. The increase in accounts receivable was primarily due to an increase in sales in the U.S. pharmacy channel, which has longer payment terms. Finally, the increase in accounts payable was primarily driven by the timing of payments.
Net cash used in investing activities was $42.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with $46.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Capital Spending—Capital expenditures were $10.5 million and $12.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and primarily related to the purchase of equipment to increase our manufacturing capacity. We expect capital expenditures for 2023 to decrease compared with 2022 given our significant investments to build capacity in 2022, including the acceleration of some of our spending on machinery and equipment for our new Malaysia facility that is under construction. We expect to fund our capital expenditures using existing cash. Investments in Developed Software—Investments in developed software were $1.5 million and $3.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and primarily related to investments in projects to support our cloud-based capabilities.Acquisitions—During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we paid Bigfoot Biomedical, Inc. $25.1 million, including transaction costs, to acquire patent assets related to pump-based AID technologies. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we paid $26.0 million to acquire substantially all the assets related to the manufacture and production of shape-memory alloy wire assemblies that are used in the production of Omnipods from Dynalloy, Inc. The remaining $3 million purchase price for this acquisition was paid during the three months ended March 31, 2023.Investments—During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we made strategic investments in private companies in the amount of $2.0 million and $5.0 million, respectively.
Net cash used in financing activities was $12.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with $20.3 million for three months ended March 31, 2022. Debt Repayments—During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we made $6.7 million in aggregate principal payments on our equipment financings, term loan, and mortgage, compared with $6.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022.Proceeds from Option Exercises—Total proceeds from option exercises were $6.0 million and $1.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The $4.9 million increase was primarily driven by option exercises by former executives.Payment of Taxes for Restricted Stock Net Settlements—Payments for taxes related to net restricted and performance stock unit settlements were $11.4 million and $15.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The $3.9 million decrease was primarily driven by lower achievement of the performance stock units that vested during the period.
The significant estimates and judgments related to establishing litigation reserves are discussed under “Legal Proceedings” in Note 11  to the consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-Q.
As of March 31, 2023, we had various letters of credit totaling $18.1 million, primarily related to amounts issued under our $20 million uncommitted letter of credit facility to backstop a bank guarantee that serves as security for land and building in Malaysia while under construction.
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to use judgment in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.Our accounting policies for revenue recognition and contingencies are based on, among other things, judgments and assumptions made by management that include inherent risks and uncertainties. There have been no significant changes to the above critical accounting policies or in the underlying accounting assumptions and estimates used in such policies from those disclosed in our annual consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
This quarterly report on Form 10-Q contains forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements relate to future events or our future financial performance. We generally identify forward looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expects,” “plans,” “anticipates,” “could,” “intends,” “targets,” “projects,” “contemplates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “predicts,” “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other similar words. These statements are only predictions. We have based these forward-looking statements largely on our current expectations and projections about future events and financial trends that we believe may affect our business, results of operations and financial condition. The outcomes of the events described in these forward-looking statements are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to: •adverse changes in general economic conditions as well as risks associated with public health crises and pandemics, such as the COVID-19 global pandemic, government actions and restrictive measures implemented in response, supply chain disruptions, delays in clinical trials, and other impacts to the business, our customers, suppliers, and employees;•dependence on a principal product platform; •ability to maintain and grow our customer base;•ability to scale our business to support revenue growth, maintain an effective sales force and expand our distribution network;•ability to secure and retain adequate coverage or reimbursement from third-party payors;•impact of healthcare reform laws; •impact of competitive products, technological change, and product innovation;•ability to design, develop, manufacture and commercialize future products; •inability to maintain or enter into new license or other agreements with respect to continuous glucose monitors, data management systems or other rights necessary to sell our current product and/or commercialize future products;•challenges to the future development of our non-insulin drug delivery product line; •international business risks, including regulatory, commercial and logistics risks;•supply problems or price fluctuations with sole source or third-party suppliers on which we are dependent; •failure to retain key suppliers; •ability to protect our intellectual property and other proprietary rights and potential conflicts with the intellectual property of third parties;•extensive government regulation applicable to medical devices as well as complex and evolving privacy and data protection laws; •adverse regulatory or legal actions relating to the Omnipod System or future products; •failure of our contract manufacturer or component suppliers to comply with the FDA’s quality system regulations;•potential adverse impacts resulting from a recall, or discovery of serious safety issues, product liability lawsuits relating to off-label use, the potential violation of anti-bribery/anti-corruption laws; breaches or failures of our product or information technology systems, including by cyberattack;•unfavorable results of clinical studies, including issues with third parties conducting any studies, or future publication of articles or announcement of positions by diabetes associations or other organizations that are unfavorable; •the concentration of manufacturing operations and storage of inventory in a limited number of locations; •loss of employees or inability to identify and recruit new employees; •risks associated with potential future acquisitions or investments in new businesses; •ability to generate sufficient cash to service our indebtedness or raise additional funds on acceptable terms or at all; •the volatility of the trading price of our common stock; •risks related to the conversion of outstanding Convertible Senior Notes; and •potential limitations on our ability to use our net operating loss carryforwards.The risk factors discussed in “Risk Factors” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 and in this Quarterly Report could cause our results to differ materially from those expressed in forward-looking statements. In addition, there may be other risks and uncertainties that we are unable to predict at this time or that we currently do not expect to have a material adverse effect on our business. Actual results could differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements; accordingly, you should not rely upon forward-looking statements as predictions of future events. We expressly disclaim any obligation to update these forward-looking statements other than as required by law.