
Net sales were approximately $4.4 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023, an increase of 1.7% compared to the prior year, driven by higher selling prices. The Company increased net sales despite lower absolute levels of demand in Europe due to geopolitical issues, slower manufacturing recovery in China and lower do-it-yourself paint demand in most regions.Income before income taxes was $353 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, an increase of $275 million compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily due to selling price increases and the absence of $290 million of Impairment and other related charges recorded in the first quarter 2022, partially offset by lower sales volumes and a $190 million Pension settlement charge in the first quarter 2023.
Net sales increased $72 million due to the following:
For specific business results, see the Performance of Reportable Business Segments section within Item 2 of this Form 10-Q.Cost of sales, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, decreased $102 million primarily due to lower sales volumes and favorable foreign currency translation impacts.Selling, general and administrative expense increased $18 million primarily due to wage and other cost inflation, partially offset by favorable currency translation impacts and savings from previously approved restructuring actions.Interest expense increased $29 million primarily due to the unfavorable impact of higher interest rates on PPG’s variable rate debt obligations. Interest income increased $16 million primarily due to higher interest rates.Impairment and other related charges of $290 million were recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2022 associated with the wind down of the Company's operations in Russia. Refer to Note 7, "Impairment and Other Related Charges" in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for additional information. There were no impairment charges recorded during the first quarter 2023.A pension settlement charge of $190 million was recorded in the first quarter 2023 associated with the Company's purchase of group annuity contracts that transferred pension benefit obligations for certain of the company’s retirees in the U.S. to third-party insurance companies. Refer to Note 10, "Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits" in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for additional information.
The effective tax rate of 70.5% for the three months ended March 31, 2022 reflected a tax benefit of $27 million on the $290 million Impairment and other related charges associated with PPG's operations in Russia.Adjusted earnings per diluted share for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased year-over-year primarily due to increased selling prices partially offset by lower sales volumes.
PPG believes investors’ understanding of the Company’s performance is enhanced by the disclosure of net income from continuing operations, earnings per diluted share from continuing operations, PPG’s effective tax rate and segment income adjusted for certain items. PPG’s management considers this information useful in providing insight into the Company’s ongoing performance because it excludes the impact of items that cannot reasonably be expected to recur on a quarterly basis or that are not attributable to our primary operations. Net income from continuing operations, earnings per diluted share from continuing operations, the effective tax rate and segment income adjusted for these items are not recognized financial measures determined in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and should not be considered a substitute for net income from continuing operations, earnings per diluted share from continuing operations, the effective tax rate, segment income or other financial measures as computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In addition, adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per diluted share and the adjusted effective tax rate may not be comparable to similarly titled measures as reported by other companies.Income before income taxes from continuing operations is reconciled to adjusted income before income taxes from continuing operations, the effective tax rate from continuing operations is reconciled to the adjusted effective tax rate from continuing operations and net income from continuing operations (attributable to PPG) and earnings per share – assuming dilution (attributable to PPG) are reconciled to adjusted net income from continuing operations (attributable to PPG) and adjusted earnings per share – assuming dilution below.
(a)Earnings per diluted share is calculated based on unrounded numbers. Figures in the table may not recalculate due to rounding.(b)In the first quarter 2023, PPG purchased group annuity contracts that transferred pension benefit obligations for certain of the company’s retirees in the U.S. to third-party insurance companies, resulting in a non-cash pension settlement charge.(c)The company incurred expenses due to damages at a southern U.S. factory resulting from a hurricane in 2020. In the first quarter 2023, the company received reimbursement under its insurance policies related to the damages incurred at this factory due to this hurricane.(d)In the first quarter 2022, the Company recorded impairment and other related charges due to the wind down of the company’s operations in Russia.(e)Included in business restructuring-related costs, net are business restructuring charges, accelerated depreciation of certain assets and other related costs, offset by releases related to previously approved programs.(f)Acquisition-related costs include advisory, legal, accounting, valuation, other professional or consulting fees, and certain internal costs directly incurred to effect acquisitions. These costs are included in Selling, general and administrative expense in the condensed consolidated statement of income.
Performance Coatings net sales increased due to the following:
Architectural coatings – EMEA net sales, excluding the impact of currency, acquisitions, divestitures and the wind down of Russia operations ("organic sales") were flat year over year as selling price increases were offset by lower sales volumes. Demand for architectural products in many countries decreased year over year primarily stemming from lower consumer confidence due to continued geopolitical issues in Europe.Architectural coatings - Americas and Asia Pacific organic sales increased by a high single-digit percentage. Sales volumes in the U.S. and Canada were favorably impacted by continued strength in professional demand and new business wins, which more than offset the impact of weakened demand in the construction market. In Mexico, PPG Comex architectural coatings organic sales increased compared to the prior year as concessionaire network demand continued to be strong and further selling price increases were implemented. Automotive refinish coatings organic sales were flat year over year as selling price increases were offset by lower sales volumes, which were negatively impacted by customer order patterns in the U.S. and continued distributor destocking in certain countries in Europe. Demand at U.S. collision body shops remained strong.Aerospace coatings sales volumes increased by a high-teen percentage as demand was strong in all regions. Sales also increased due to the benefit of higher selling prices.Protective and marine coatings organic sales were higher by a mid-single-digit percentage primarily due to selling price increases and strong demand in the U.S. and Latin America. Sales volumes were negatively impacted by COVID-19 restrictions in China.Traffic solutions organic sales decreased by a high single-digit percentage due to lower sales volumes driven by unfavorable weather and customer order patterns. Segment income increased $76 million year over year primarily due to higher selling prices, which more than offset aggregate cost inflation and lower sales volumes.
In the second quarter, demand conditions in Europe are expected to stabilize at lower levels than before the war in Ukraine, and economic activity in China is expected to continue to improve, albeit at a modest pace through the rest of 2023. Raw material and transportation availability are returning to pre-pandemic levels. Aggregate sales volumes are anticipated to be in the range of flat to up by a low single-digit percentage compared to the second quarter 2022. Second quarter divestiture-related sales and sales related to the Russia business, which the company is in the process of winding down, are estimated to reduce sales by about $20 million. The Company will continue to focus on executing against various existing cost-savings initiatives.
Industrial Coatings segment net sales increased due to the following:
Automotive OEM coatings organic sales increased by nearly 10% year over year driven by higher selling prices in all regions and strong sales volume growth in Europe.In the industrial coatings business, organic sales decreased by a low single-digit percentage year over year as higher selling prices were more than offset by lower sales volumes in Europe and China due to softer general industrial production. Sales volumes in the U.S. were impacted by lower demand in the coil, extrusion and appliances subsegments.Packaging coatings organic sales increased by a low single-digit percentage primarily due to selling price increases in most regions, partially offset by lower sales volumes in all regions. Sales volumes in the U.S. were negatively impacted by lower demand in the metal packaged food subsegment.Segment income increased $100 million year over year primarily due to higher selling prices which more than offset lower sales volumes.
In the second quarter, global industrial production is expected to remain at lower levels. In China, manufacturing activity is expected to modestly improve on a sequential basis. Aggregate sales volumes are anticipated to decrease by a low single-digit percentage compared to the second quarter 2022. While sales volumes in automotive OEM coatings are expected to be higher than the prior year quarter, sales volumes are expected to be lower compared to the prior year in the industrial coatings, packaging coatings, and specialty coatings and materials businesses. Positive selling price increases are expected to continue; although, some of the strong selling prices realized in 2022 will begin to reach their anniversary in the second quarter. Year-over-year segment margins are expected to continue to improve on a sequential basis in the second quarter 2023. The Company will continue to focus on executing against various existing cost-savings initiatives.
PPG had cash and short-term investments totaling $1.5 billion and $1.2 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively.The Company continues to believe that cash on hand and short-term investments, cash from operations and the Company's access to capital markets will be sufficient to fund our operating activities, capital spending, acquisitions, dividend payments, debt service, share repurchases, contributions to pension plans and PPG's contractual obligations.
Cash from operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $85 million. Cash used for operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was $304 million. The $389 million increase was primarily due to higher net income driven by better price realization and favorable changes in working capital in the first quarter 2023 compared to the prior year.
Operating working capital is a subset of total working capital and represents (1) trade receivables – net of the allowance for doubtful accounts (2) FIFO inventories and (3) trade liabilities. We believe operating working capital represents the key components of working capital under the operating control of our businesses. A key metric we use to measure our working capital management is operating working capital as a percentage of sales (current quarter sales annualized).
Cash used for investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $64 million and $183 million, respectively. The $119 million decrease in cash used for investing activities was primarily due to lower capital expenditures compared to the prior year.Total capital spending is expected to be in the range of $500 million to $550 million in 2023 in support of future organic growth opportunities.
Cash from financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was $277 million and $443 million, respectively. The $166 million decrease was primarily due to repayments of long-term debt and the Term Loan Credit Agreement in the first quarter 2023, partially offset by increased borrowings with maturities of three months or less.
In March 2023, PPG's $300 million 3.2% notes matured, and the Company repaid this obligation using cash on hand. In addition, in the first quarter 2023, PPG repaid $100 million of the Term Loan Credit Agreement using cash on hand.  Refer to Note 6, “Borrowings” in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for additional information. In March 2022, PPG privately placed a 15-year €50 million 1.95% fixed interest note. Refer to Note 6, “Borrowings” in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for additional information. In April 2023, PPG entered into a €500 million Term Loan Credit Agreement.  Refer to Note 6, “Borrowings” in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for additional information.
In February 2021, PPG entered into a $2.0 billion Term Loan Credit Agreement (the "Term Loan Credit Agreement") to finance the Company’s acquisition of Tikkurila, and to pay fees, costs and expenses related thereto. The Term Loan Credit Agreement provided the Company with the ability to borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion on an unsecured basis. In addition to the amounts borrowed to finance the acquisition of Tikkurila, the Term Loan Credit Agreement allowed the Company to make up to eleven additional borrowings prior to December 31, 2021, to be used for working capital and general corporate purposes. The Term Loan Credit Agreement contains covenants that are consistent with those in the Credit Agreement discussed below and that are usual and customary restrictive covenants for facilities of its type, which include, with specified exceptions, limitations on the Company’s ability to create liens or other encumbrances, to enter into sale and leaseback transactions and to enter into consolidations, mergers or transfers of all or substantially all of its assets. The Term Loan Credit Agreement matures and all outstanding borrowings are due and payable on the third anniversary of the date of the initial borrowing under the Agreement. In March 2023, PPG amended the Term Loan Credit Agreement to replace the LIBOR-based reference interest rate option with a reference interest rate option based upon Term Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR"). The other terms of the Term Loan Credit Agreement remain unchanged.In March 2023, PPG amended its five-year credit agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) dated as of August 30, 2019. The amendments to the Credit Agreement replace the LIBOR-based reference interest rate option with a reference interest rate option based upon Term SOFR. The other terms of the Credit Agreement remain unchanged. The Credit Agreement provides for a $2.2 billion unsecured revolving credit facility. The Company has the ability to increase the size of the Credit Agreement by up to an additional $750 million, subject to the receipt of lender commitments and other conditions precedent. The Credit Agreement will terminate on August 30, 2024. The Company has the right, subject to certain conditions set forth in the Credit Agreement, to designate certain subsidiaries of the Company as borrowers under the Credit Agreement. In connection with any such designation, the Company is required to guarantee the obligations of any such subsidiaries under the Credit Agreement. There were no amounts outstanding under the credit agreement as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. The Term Loan Credit Agreement and Credit Agreement require the Company to maintain a ratio of Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization, as defined in the Term Loan Credit Agreement and Credit Agreement, of 60% or less; provided, that for any fiscal quarter in which the Company has made an acquisition for consideration in excess of $1 billion and for the next five fiscal quarters thereafter, the ratio of Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization may not exceed 65% at any time.  As of March 31, 2023, Total Indebtedness to Total Capitalization as defined under the Credit Agreement and Term Loan Credit Agreement was 49%.The Credit Agreement also supports the Company’s commercial paper borrowings which are classified as long-term based on PPG’s intent and ability to refinance these borrowings on a long-term basis. There were $638 million commercial paper borrowings outstanding as of March 31, 2023. There no commercial paper borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2022.
Aggregate restructuring savings, including the impact of acquisition synergies, were approximately $15 million in the first quarter 2023. Total restructuring savings are expected to be at least $60 million in 2023. In addition, the Company continues to review its cost structure to identify additional cost savings opportunities. Refer to Note 5, “Business Restructuring” in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for further details on the Company's business restructuring programs. We expect cash outlays related to these actions of approximately $100 million in 2023.
Comparing spot exchange rates at December 31, 2022 and at March 31, 2023, the U.S. dollar weakened against the currencies of many countries within the regions PPG operates, most notably the Mexican peso, the euro and the British pound. As a result, consolidated net assets at March 31, 2023 increased by $263 million compared to December 31, 2022.Comparing average exchange rates during the first three months of 2023 to those of the first three months of 2022, the U.S. dollar strengthened against the currencies of many countries where PPG operates, including many of the countries in the EMEA region. This had an unfavorable impact on Income before income taxes for the three months ended March 31, 2023 of $7 million from the translation of these foreign earnings into U.S. dollars.
Refer to Note 2, “New Accounting Standards” in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for further details on recently issued accounting guidance.
PPG is involved in a number of lawsuits and claims, both actual and potential, including some that it has asserted against others, in which substantial monetary damages are sought. See Part II, Item 1, “Legal Proceedings” of this Form 10-Q and Note 14, “Commitments and Contingent Liabilities” in Part I, Item 1 of this Form 10-Q for a description of certain of these lawsuits.As discussed in Part II, Item 1 and Note 14, although the result of any future litigation of such lawsuits and claims is inherently unpredictable, management believes that, in the aggregate, the outcome of all lawsuits and claims involving PPG, including asbestos-related claims, will not have a material effect on PPG’s consolidated financial position or liquidity; however, any such outcome may be material to the results of operations of any particular period in which costs, if any, are recognized.As also discussed in Note 14, PPG has significant reserves for environmental contingencies. Refer to the Environmental Matters section of Note 14 for details of these reserves. It is PPG’s policy to accrue expenses for contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. Reserves for environmental contingencies are exclusive of claims against third parties and are generally not discounted. In management’s opinion, the Company operates in an environmentally sound manner and the outcome of the Company’s environmental contingencies will not have a material effect on PPG’s financial position or liquidity; however, any such outcome may be material to the results of operations of any particular period in which costs, if any, are recognized. Management anticipates that the resolution of the Company’s environmental contingencies will occur over an extended period of time.
Management has evaluated the accounting policies used in the preparation of the financial statements and related notes presented in this Form 10-Q and believes those policies to be reasonable and appropriate. We believe that the most critical accounting estimates made in the preparation of our financial statements are those related to accounting for contingencies, under which we accrue a loss when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated, and to accounting for pensions, other postretirement benefits, business combinations, goodwill and other identifiable intangible assets with indefinite lives because of the importance of management judgment in making the estimates necessary to apply these policies.For a comprehensive discussion of the Company’s critical accounting estimates, see Item 7, "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2022 Form 10-K. There were no material changes in the Company’s critical accounting estimates from the 2022 Form 10-K.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis and other sections of this Quarterly Report contain forward-looking statements that reflect the Company’s current views with respect to future events and financial performance. You can identify forward-looking statements by the fact that they do not relate strictly to current or historic facts. Forward-looking statements are identified by the use of the words “aim,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “project,” “outlook,” “forecast,” "looking ahead" and other expressions that indicate future events and trends. Any forward-looking statement speaks only as of the date on which such statement is made, and the Company undertakes no obligation to update any forward looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). Also, note the following cautionary statements.Many factors could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s forward-looking statements. Such factors include statements related to the expected effects on our business of COVID-19, global economic conditions, geopolitical issues in Europe, increasing price and product competition by our competitors, fluctuations in cost and availability of raw materials, energy, labor and logistics, the ability to achieve selling price increases, the ability to recover margins, customer inventory levels, PPG inventory levels, our ability to maintain favorable supplier relationships and arrangements, the timing of and the realization of anticipated cost savings from restructuring initiatives, the ability to identify additional cost savings opportunities, the timing and expected benefits of our acquisitions, difficulties in integrating acquired businesses and achieving expected synergies therefrom, the amount of future share repurchases, economic and political conditions in the markets we serve, the ability to penetrate existing, developing and emerging foreign and domestic markets, foreign exchange rates and fluctuations in such rates, fluctuations in tax rates, the impact of future legislation, the impact of environmental regulations, unexpected business disruptions, the unpredictability of existing and possible future litigation, including asbestos litigation, and government investigations. However, it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors.Consequently, while the list of factors presented here and in the 2022 Form 10-K under Item 1A is considered representative, no such list should be considered to be a complete statement of all potential risks and uncertainties. Unlisted factors may present significant additional obstacles to the realization of forward-looking statements.Consequences of material differences in the results compared with those anticipated in the forward-looking statements could include, among other things, lower sales or income, business disruption, operational problems, financial loss, legal liability to third parties, other factors set forth in Item 1A of the 2022 Form 10-K and similar risks, any of which could have a material adverse effect on the Company’s consolidated financial condition, results of operations or liquidity.