
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Quanta Services, Inc. (together with its subsidiaries, Quanta, we, us or our) should be read in conjunction with our condensed consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Quarterly Report and with our 2022 Annual Report, which was filed with the SEC on February 23, 2023 and is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and on our website at www.quantaservices.com. The discussion below contains forward-looking statements that are based upon our current expectations and are subject to uncertainty and changes in circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these expectations due to inaccurate assumptions and known or unknown risks and uncertainties, including those identified in Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements and Information above, in Item 1A. Risk Factors of Part II of this Quarterly Report and in Item 1A. Risk Factors of Part I of our 2022 Annual Report.
Our first quarter 2023 results reflect increased demand for our services, as revenue increased in all of our segments as compared to the first quarter of 2022. With respect to our Electric Power segment, utilities are continuing to invest significant capital in their electric power delivery systems through multi-year grid modernization and reliability programs, as well as system upgrades and hardening programs in response to recurring severe weather events. We have also experienced high demand for new and expanded transmission, substation and distribution infrastructure needed to reliably transport power. With respect to our Renewable Energy segment, the transition to a reduced-carbon economy is continuing to drive demand for renewable generation and related infrastructure (e.g., high-voltage electric transmission and substation infrastructure), as well as interconnection services necessary to connect and transmit renewable-generated electricity to existing electric power delivery systems. Our acquisition of Blattner Holding Company and its operating subsidiaries (collectively, Blattner) in the fourth quarter of 2021, has had a significant incremental impact on our ability to perform these services. Despite these positive longer-term trends, certain of our customers experienced supply chain challenges during 2022 that resulted in delays and shortages of, and increased costs for, materials necessary for certain projects, particularly sourcing restrictions related to solar panels necessary for the utility scale solar industry. Based on indications within this market during the first quarter of 2023, we expect the supply chain challenges and sourcing restrictions related to solar panels to improve throughout the remainder of the year.With respect to our Underground and Infrastructure segment, in 2022 and the first quarter of 2023 we experienced strong demand for our services focused on utility spending, in particular our gas distribution services to natural gas utilities that are implementing modernization programs, and our downstream industrial services, as these customers continued to move forward with certain maintenance and capital spending that was deferred during the course of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, revenues associated with large pipeline projects in Canada remained at a higher level in the first quarter of 2023.During the first quarter of 2023, increased revenues and working capital requirements from our projects resulted in $38 million of net cash provided by operating activities. Additionally, in January 2023, we acquired three businesses for a total consideration of $587 million, consisting of both cash and our common stock. Available commitments under our senior credit facility and cash and cash equivalents as of March 31, 2023 were $1.79 billion.We expect the strong demand for our services will continue. Our remaining performance obligations and backlog were $10.26 billion and $25.27 billion as of March 31, 2023, representing increases of 16.5%, and 4.9% relative to December 31, 2022. For a reconciliation of backlog to remaining performance obligations, the most comparable financial measure prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP), see Non-GAAP Financial Measures below.
Our revenues, profit, margins and other results of operations can be influenced by a variety of factors in any given period, including those described in Item 1. Business and Item 1A. Risk Factors of Part I of our 2022 Annual Report, and those factors have caused fluctuations in our results in the past and are expected to cause fluctuations in our results in the future. Additional information with respect to certain of those factors is provided below.Seasonality. Typically, our revenues are lowest in the first quarter of the year because cold, snowy or wet conditions can create challenging working environments that are more costly for our customers or cause delays on projects. In addition, infrastructure projects often do not begin in a meaningful way until our customers finalize their capital budgets, which typically occurs during the first quarter. Second quarter revenues are typically higher than those in the first quarter, as some projects begin, but continued cold and wet weather can often impact productivity. Third quarter revenues are typically the highest of the year, as a greater number of projects are underway and operating conditions, including weather, are normally more accommodating. Generally, revenues during the fourth quarter are lower than the third quarter but higher than the second quarter, as many projects are completed and customers often seek to spend their capital budgets before year end. However, the holiday season and inclement weather can sometimes cause delays during the fourth quarter, reducing revenues and increasing costs. These seasonal impacts are typical for our U.S. operations, but seasonality for our international operations may differ. For example, revenues for certain projects in Canada are typically higher in the first quarter because projects are often accelerated in order to complete work while the ground is frozen and prior to the break up, or seasonal thaw, as productivity is adversely affected by wet ground conditions during warmer months. Weather, natural disasters and emergencies. The results of our business in a given period can be impacted by adverse weather conditions, severe weather events, natural disasters or other emergencies, which include, among other things, heavy or prolonged snowfall or rainfall, hurricanes, tropical storms, tornadoes, floods, blizzards, extreme temperatures, wildfires, post-wildfire floods and debris flows, pandemics and earthquakes. Climate change has the potential to increase the frequency and extremity of severe weather events. These conditions and events can negatively impact our financial results due to, among other things, the termination, deferral or delay of projects, reduced productivity and exposure to significant liabilities due to failure of electrical power or other infrastructure on which we have performed services. However, severe weather events can also increase our emergency restoration services, which typically yield higher margins due in part to higher equipment utilization and absorption of fixed costs. Demand for services. We perform the majority of our services under existing contracts, including MSAs and similar agreements pursuant to which our customers are not committed to specific volumes of our services. Therefore our volume of business can be positively or negatively affected by fluctuations in the amount of work our customers assign us in a given period, which may vary by geographic region. Examples of items that may cause demand for our services to fluctuate materially from quarter to quarter include: the financial condition of our customers, their capital spending and their access to capital; acceleration of any projects or programs by customers (e.g., modernization or hardening programs); economic and political conditions on a regional, national or global scale, including availability of renewable energy tax credits; interest rates; governmental regulations affecting the sourcing and costs of materials and equipment; other changes in U.S. and global trade relationships; and project deferrals and cancellations. Revenue mix and impact on margins. The mix of revenues based on the types of services we provide in a given period will impact margins, as certain industries and services provide higher-margin opportunities. Our larger or more complex projects typically include, among others, transmission projects with higher voltage capacities; pipeline projects with larger-diameter throughput capacities; large-scale renewable generation projects; and projects with increased engineering, design or construction complexities, more difficult terrain or geographical requirements, or longer distance requirements. These projects typically yield opportunities for higher margins than our recurring services under MSAs described above, as we assume a greater degree of performance risk and there is greater utilization of our resources for longer construction timeframes. However, larger projects are subject to additional risk of regulatory delay and cyclicality. Project schedules also fluctuate, particularly in connection with larger, more complex or longer-term projects, which can affect the amount of work performed in a given period. Furthermore, smaller or less complex projects typically have a greater number of companies competing for them, and competitors at times may more aggressively pursue available work. A greater percentage of smaller scale or less complex work also could negatively impact margins due to the inefficiency of transitioning between a greater number of smaller projects versus continuous production on fewer larger projects. As a result, at times we may choose to maintain a portion of our workforce and equipment in an underutilized capacity to ensure we are strategically positioned to deliver on larger projects when they move forward.Project variability and performance. Margins for a single project may fluctuate period to period due to changes in the volume or type of work performed, the pricing structure under the project contract or job productivity. Additionally, our productivity and performance on a project can vary period to period based on a number of factors, including unexpected project difficulties or site conditions (including in connection with difficult geographic characteristics); project location, including locations with challenging operating conditions; whether the work is on an open or encumbered right of way; inclement weather or severe weather events; environmental restrictions or regulatory delays; protests, other political activity or legal challenges related to a project; the performance of third parties; and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, we currently generate a significant portion of our revenues under fixed price contracts, and fixed price contracts are more common in connection with our larger and more complex projects that typically involve greater performance risk. Under these contracts, we assume risks related to project estimates and execution, and project revenues can vary, sometimes substantially, from our original projections due to a variety of factors, including the additional complexity, timing uncertainty or extended bidding, regulatory and permitting processes associated with these projects. These variations can result in a reduction in expected profit, the incurrence of losses on a project or the issuance of change orders and/or assertion of contract claims against customers. See Revenue Recognition - Contract Estimates and Changes in Estimates in Note 3 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report.Subcontract work and provision of materials. Work that is subcontracted to other service providers generally yields lower margins, and therefore an increase in subcontract work in a given period can decrease operating margins. In recent years, we have subcontracted approximately 20% of our work to other service providers. Our customers are usually responsible for supplying the materials for their projects. However, under some contracts we agree to procure all or part of the required materials. Margins may be lower on projects where we furnish a significant amount of materials, as our markup on materials is generally lower than our markup on labor costs, and in a given period an increase in the percentage of work with greater materials procurement requirements may decrease our overall margins, including in some cases our assuming price risk. Furthermore, fluctuations in the price or availability of materials, equipment and consumables that we or our customers utilize could impact costs to complete projects.
The following table sets forth selected statements of operations data, such data as a percentage of revenues for the periods indicated, as well as the dollar and percentage change from the prior period (dollars in thousands). The results of acquired businesses have been included in the following results of operations since their respective acquisition dates.
* The percentage change is not meaningful.
Revenues. Revenues increased due to a $197.3 million increase in revenues from our Electric Power segment, a $133.3 million increase in revenues from our Underground and Infrastructure segment and a $132.7 million increase in revenues from our Renewable Energy segment. See Segment Results below for additional information and discussion related to segment revenues.Cost of services. Costs of services primarily includes wages, benefits, subcontractor costs, materials, equipment, and other direct and indirect costs, including related depreciation. The increase in cost of services generally correlates to the increase in revenues.Equity in earnings of integral unconsolidated affiliates. The decrease was primarily related to a decrease in equity in earnings from one of our integral unconsolidated affiliates as a result of lower emergency restoration services. Selling, general and administrative expenses. The increase was partially attributable to an aggregate $27.1 million increase in the following items to support business growth: compensation expense, primarily associated with increased salaries; travel and related expenses; and training expenses. Also contributing to the increase was an $11.1 million increase in expenses associated with acquired businesses and a $7.9 million increase in expense related to deferred compensation liabilities. The fair market value changes in deferred compensation liabilities were largely offset by changes in the fair value of corporate-owned life insurance (COLI) assets associated with the deferred compensation plan, which are included in “Other (expense) income, net” as discussed below.Amortization of intangible assets. The decrease was primarily related to a $48.1 million reduction of amortization of intangible assets associated with backlog for Blattner, which was fully amortized by the third quarter of 2022, partially offset by $9.1 million of incremental amortization expense related to recent acquisitions.Change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities. Contingent consideration liabilities are payable in the event prescribed performance objectives are achieved by certain acquired businesses during designated post-acquisition periods. Future changes in fair value are expected to be recorded periodically until the contingent consideration liabilities are settled. For additional information regarding these liabilities, see Note 5 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report.Operating income. Operating income was positively impacted by a $17.5 million decrease in corporate and non-allocated costs, which includes amortization expense, as well as an $11.7 million increase in operating income for our Electric Power segment and a $13.4 million increase in operating income for our Underground and Infrastructure segment. Partially offsetting these increases was a $34.3 million decrease in operating income for our Renewable Energy segment. Results for each of our business segments and corporate and non-allocated costs are discussed in the Segment Results section below. Interest and other financing expenses. The increase primarily resulted from the impact of higher interest rates on our outstanding variable rate debt during the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.Other income (expense), net. The net other income included a $3.1 million mark-to-market gain in the three months ended March 31, 2023 associated with our deferred compensation plan, as compared to a $4.1 million mark-to-market loss in the three months ended March 31, 2022. Additionally, net other expense for the three months ended March 31, 2022 included an unrealized loss of $8.4 million that resulted from the remeasurement of the fair value of our investment in Starry Group Holdings, Inc. (Starry), as well as a $6.7 million gain from our sale of a non-controlling interest in a technology company. (Benefit from) provision for income taxes. The effective tax rates for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were a benefit of 3.7% and a provision of 7.2%. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was impacted by the recognition of a $32.0 million tax benefit resulting from non-cash stock-based compensation awards vesting at higher fair market value than their grant date fair value, as compared to the recognition of a $20.3 million tax benefit for the three months ended March 31, 2022.Comprehensive income. See Statements of Comprehensive Income in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report. Comprehensive income decreased by $0.2 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to a $13.2 million decrease in foreign currency translation gains, which was partially offset by an $11.9 million increase in net income. The predominant functional currencies for our operations outside the U.S. are Canadian and Australian dollars. The decrease in foreign currency translation gains primarily resulted from strengthening of both the Canadian and Australian dollars against the U.S. dollar for the three months ended March 31, 2022.EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA. EBITDA decreased 6.0%, or $18.4 million, to $287.5 million as compared to $305.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022, and adjusted EBITDA decreased 3.8%, or $13.1 million, to $332.4 million as compared to $345.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. For a reconciliation of EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA to net income attributable to common stock, the most comparable GAAP financial measure, see Non-GAAP Financial Measures below.
We report our results under three reportable segments: Electric Power, Renewable Energy and Underground and Infrastructure. Reportable segment information, including revenues and operating income by type of work, is gathered from each of our operating companies. Classification of our operating company revenues by type of work for segment reporting purposes can at times require judgment on the part of management. Our operating companies may perform joint projects for customers in multiple industries, deliver multiple types of services under a single customer contract or provide service offerings to various industries. For example, we perform joint trenching projects to install distribution lines for electric power and natural gas customers. Integrated operations and common administrative support for operating companies require that certain allocations be made to determine segment profitability, including allocations of corporate shared and indirect operating costs as well as general and administrative costs. Certain corporate costs are not allocated, including corporate facility costs; non-allocated corporate salaries, benefits and incentive compensation; acquisition and integration costs; non-cash stock-based compensation; amortization related to intangible assets; asset impairments related to goodwill and intangible assets; and change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities.The following table sets forth segment revenues, segment operating income (loss) and operating margins for the periods indicated. Operating margin is calculated by dividing operating income (loss) by revenues. The following table also includes the dollar and percentage change from the prior period (dollars in thousands):
Revenues. The increase in revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was due to increased spending by our utility customers on grid modernization and hardening, as well as approximately $65 million in revenues attributable to acquired businesses. Operating Income. Operating income increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to the increase in revenues explained above. Operating margin decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023 partially due to $5.5 million of lower equity in earnings from our integral unconsolidated affiliates, primarily due to reduced emergency restoration services revenues for one of these affiliates.
Revenues. The increase in revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily due to the timing of large renewable energy projects, as well as approximately $35 million in revenues attributable to acquired businesses. These increases were partially offset by approximately $17 million as a result of unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates.Operating Income. The decrease in operating income and operating margin during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was attributable to access delays, logistical challenges and other issues outside of our control that increased costs associated with a large renewable energy project in Canada and cost absorption pressure related to higher levels of fixed costs related to resources required to support the expected increase in project activity in the second half of 2023 and into 2024.
Revenues. The increase in revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was due to higher demand from our gas utility services and industrial services customers, as well as increased revenues associated with large pipeline projects in Canada. These increases were partially offset by approximately $22 million as a result of unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates.Operating Income. The increase in operating income and operating margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily due to the increase in revenues, which contributed to higher levels of fixed cost absorption.
The decrease in corporate and non-allocated costs during the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily due to a $43.3 million decrease in intangible asset amortization, largely associated with the acquisition of Blattner. This decrease was partially offset by an aggregate increase of $25.8 million primarily related to deferred compensation liabilities due to market fluctuations; compensation expense, primarily related to non-cash stock compensation expense and salaries due partially to growth in business; acquisition and integration costs related to recent acquisitions; and training costs.
EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, financial measures not recognized under GAAP, when used in connection with net income attributable to common stock, are intended to provide useful information to investors and analysts as they evaluate our performance. EBITDA is defined as earnings before interest and other financing expenses, taxes, depreciation and amortization, and adjusted EBITDA is defined as EBITDA adjusted for certain other items as described below. These measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income attributable to common stock or other financial measures of performance that are derived in accordance with GAAP. Management believes that the exclusion of these items from net income attributable to common stock enables us and our investors to more effectively evaluate our operations period over period and to identify operating trends that might not be apparent when including the excluded items. As to certain of the items below, (i) non-cash stock-based compensation expense varies from period to period due to acquisition activity, changes in the estimated fair value of performance-based awards, forfeiture rates, accelerated vesting and amounts granted; (ii) acquisition and integration costs vary from period to period depending on the level of our acquisition activity; (iii) equity in (earnings) losses of non-integral unconsolidated affiliates varies from period to period depending on the activity and financial performance of such affiliates, the operations of which are not operationally integral to us; (iv) unrealized mark-to-market adjustments on investments vary from period to period based on fluctuations in the market price of such company’s common stock; (v) gains and losses on the sale of investments vary from period to period depending on activity; and (vi) change in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities varies from period to period depending on the performance in post-acquisition periods of certain acquired businesses, and the effect of present value accretion on fair value calculations. Because EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA, as defined, exclude some, but not all, items that affect net income attributable to common stock, such measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. The most comparable GAAP financial measure, net income attributable to common stock, and information reconciling the GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures, are included below. The following table shows dollars in thousands.
(1)    The amount for the three months ended March 31, 2022 includes $11.5 million of expenses that are associated with change of control payments as a result of the acquisition of Blattner. (2)     The amount for the three months ended March 31, 2022 is an unrealized loss from a decrease in fair value of our investment in Starry.(3)     The amount for the three months ended March 31, 2022 is a gain as a result of the sale of a non-marketable equity security interest equity in a technology company.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract with a customer to transfer a distinct good or service. Our remaining performance obligations represent management’s estimate of consolidated revenues that are expected to be realized from the remaining portion of firm orders under fixed price contracts not yet completed or for which work has not yet begun, which includes estimated revenues attributable to consolidated joint ventures and variable interest entities, revenues from funded and unfunded portions of government contracts to the extent they are reasonably expected to be realized, and revenues from change orders and claims to the extent management believes they will be earned and are probable of collection.We have also historically disclosed our backlog, a measure commonly used in our industry but not recognized under GAAP. We believe this measure enables management to more effectively forecast our future capital needs and results and better identify future operating trends that may not otherwise be apparent. We believe this measure is also useful for investors in forecasting our future results and comparing us to our competitors. Our remaining performance obligations are a component of backlog, which also includes estimated orders under MSAs, including estimated renewals, and non-fixed price contracts expected to be completed within one year. Our methodology for determining backlog may not be comparable to the methodologies used by other companies.As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, MSAs accounted for 50% and 52% of our estimated 12-month backlog and 61% and 65% of our total backlog. Generally, our customers are not contractually committed to specific volumes of services under our MSAs, and most of our contracts can be terminated on short notice even if we are not in default. We determine the estimated backlog for these MSAs using recurring historical trends, factoring in seasonal demand and projected customer needs based upon ongoing communications. In addition, many of our MSAs are subject to renewal, and these potential renewals are considered in determining estimated backlog. As a result, estimates for remaining performance obligations and backlog are subject to change based on, among other things, project accelerations; project cancellations or delays, including but not limited to those caused by commercial issues, regulatory requirements, natural disasters, emergencies and adverse weather conditions; and final acceptance of change orders by customers. These factors can cause revenues to be realized in periods and at levels that are different than originally projected.The following table reconciles total remaining performance obligations to our backlog (a non-GAAP financial measure) by reportable segment along with estimates of amounts expected to be realized within 12 months (in thousands):
The increase in remaining performance obligations from December 31, 2022 to March 31, 2023 was attributable to multiple new project awards, while the increase in backlog was attributable to these new awards and extensions and increases in expected volumes under MSAs.
We plan to fund our working capital, capital expenditures, debt service, dividends and other cash requirements with our current available liquidity and cash from operations, which could be affected by general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. Management monitors financial markets and national and global economic conditions for factors that may affect our liquidity and capital resources. Our capital deployment priorities that require the use of cash include: (i) working capital to fund ongoing operating needs, (ii) capital expenditures to meet anticipated demand for our services, (iii) acquisitions and investments to facilitate the long-term growth and sustainability of our business, and (iv) return of capital to stockholders, including through the payment of dividends and repurchases of our outstanding common stock. We intend to fund these requirements primarily with cash flow from operating activities, as well as debt financing as needed.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, there were no material changes outside the ordinary course of business in the specified contractual obligations or changes to our capital allocation priorities as set forth in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II of the 2022 Annual Report. We anticipate that our future cash flows from operating activities, cash and cash equivalents on hand, existing borrowing capacity under our senior credit facility and commercial paper program and ability to access capital markets for additional capital will provide sufficient funds to enable us to meet our cash requirements for the next twelve months and over the longer term.
Cash flow from operating activities is primarily influenced by demand for our services and operating margins but is also influenced by the timing of working capital needs associated with the various types of services that we provide. Our working capital needs may increase when we commence large volumes of work under circumstances where project costs are required to be paid before the associated receivables are billed and collected. Additionally, operating cash flows may be negatively impacted as a result of unpaid and delayed change orders and claims. Changes in project timing due to delays or accelerations and other economic, regulatory, market and political factors that may affect customer spending could also impact cash flow from operating activities. Further information with respect to our cash flow from operating activities is set forth below and in Note 16 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report.Our available commitments under our senior credit facility and cash and cash equivalents as of March 31, 2023 were as follows (in thousands):
(1)    Represents unsecured notes issued under our commercial paper program, which allows for the issuance of notes up to a maximum aggregate face amount of $1.0 billion outstanding at any time. Available commitments for revolving loans under our senior credit facility must be maintained to provide credit support for notes issued under our commercial paper program, and therefore such notes effectively reduce the available borrowing capacity under our senior credit facility.(2)    Further information with respect to our cash and cash equivalents is set forth below and in Note 15 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report. This amount includes $135.6 million in jurisdictions outside of the U.S., principally in Canada and Australia. There are currently no legal or economic restrictions that would materially impede our ability to repatriate cash.We consider our investment policies related to cash and cash equivalents to be conservative, as we maintain a diverse portfolio of what we believe to be high-quality cash and cash equivalent investments with short-term maturities. Additionally, subject to the conditions specified in the credit agreement for our senior credit facility, we have the option to increase the capacity of our senior credit facility, in the form of an increase in the revolving commitments, term loans or a combination thereof, from time to time, upon receipt of additional commitments from new or existing lenders by up to an additional (i) $400.0 million plus (ii) additional amounts so long as the Incremental Leverage Ratio Requirement (as defined in the credit agreement) is satisfied at the time of such increase. The Incremental Leverage Ratio Requirement requires, among other things, after giving pro forma effect to such increase and the use of proceeds therefrom, compliance with the credit agreement’s financial covenants as of the most recent fiscal quarter end for which financial statements were required to be delivered. Further information with respect to our debt obligations is set forth in Note 8 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report. We may also seek to access the capital markets from time to time to raise additional capital, increase liquidity as necessary, refinance or extend the term of our existing indebtedness, fund acquisitions or otherwise fund our capital needs. While our financial strategy and consistent performance have allowed us to maintain investment grade ratings, our ability to access capital markets in the future depends on a number of factors, including our financial performance and financial position, our credit ratings, industry conditions, general economic conditions, our backlog, capital expenditure commitments, market conditions and market perceptions of us and our industry.
In summary, our cash flows for each period were as follows (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities of $38.4 million and $85.1 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 primarily reflected earnings adjusted for non-cash items and cash used by the main components of working capital: “Accounts and notes receivable,” “Contract assets,” “Prepaid expenses and other current assets,” “Accounts payable and accrued expenses,” and “Contract liabilities.”As discussed above, cash flow provided by operating activities is primarily influenced by demand for our services and operating margins but is also influenced by working capital needs. Our working capital needs may increase when we commence large volumes of work under circumstances where project costs, primarily labor, equipment and subcontractors, are required to be paid before the associated receivables are billed and collected and when we incur costs for work that is the subject of unpaid change orders and claims. Accordingly, changes within working capital in accounts receivable, contract assets and contract liabilities are normally related and are typically affected on a collective basis by changes in revenue due to the timing and volume of work performed and variability in the timing of customer billings and payments, as well as change orders and claims. Additionally, working capital needs are generally higher during the summer and fall due to increased demand for our services when favorable weather conditions exist in many of our operating regions. Conversely, working capital assets are typically converted to cash during the winter. These seasonal trends can be offset by changes in project timing due to delays or accelerations and other economic factors that may affect customer spending, including market conditions or the impact of certain unforeseen events (e.g., regulatory and other actions that impact the supply chain for certain materials).Days sales outstanding (DSO) represents the average number of days it takes revenues to be converted into cash, which management believes is an important metric for assessing liquidity. A decrease in DSO has a favorable impact on cash flow from operating activities, while an increase in DSO has a negative impact on cash flow from operating activities. DSO is calculated by using the sum of current accounts receivable, net of allowance (which includes retainage and unbilled balances), plus contract assets, less contract liabilities, and divided by average revenues per day during the quarter. DSO as of March 31, 2023 was 77 days, which was lower than DSO of 80 days as of March 31, 2022 and lower than our five-year historical average DSO of 80 days. This decrease in DSO as compared to March 31, 2022 was partially due to an increase in contract liabilities related to favorable billing terms on certain large projects, as well as increased revenues. The favorable impact on operating cash flow related to the decrease in DSO was partially offset by increased working capital requirements primarily related to a large renewable transmission project in Canada and the timing of the associated billings, as well as the prepayment of amounts related to certain project materials that require a long lead time.
Net cash used in investing activities in the three months ended March 31, 2023 included $452.3 million related to acquisitions and $80.3 million of capital expenditures. Partially offsetting these items were $39.1 million of proceeds from the sale of a non-integral equity investment and $10.4 million of proceeds from the sale of property and equipment. Further information with respect to our acquisitions and investments in affiliates is set forth in Notes 5 and 6 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 1. Financial Statements of Part I of this Quarterly Report. Net cash used in investing activities in the three months ended March 31, 2022 included $109.9 million of capital expenditures and $8.3 million of cash paid for equity and other investments. Partially offsetting these items was $16.5 million of cash received from investments, which primarily related to proceeds received from the sale of an investment, and $8.8 million of proceeds from the sale of property and equipment. Our industry is capital intensive, and we expect substantial capital expenditures and commitments for equipment purchases and equipment lease and rental arrangements to be needed for the foreseeable future in order to meet anticipated demand for our services. In addition, we expect to continue to pursue strategic acquisitions and investments, although we cannot predict the timing or amount of the cash needed for these initiatives.
Net cash provided by financing activities in the three months ended March 31, 2023 included $380.6 million of net borrowings under our senior credit facility and commercial paper program, partially offset by $108.7 million of cash payments to satisfy tax withholding obligations associated with stock-based compensation; $12.8 million of cash payments for dividends and $8.7 million of distributions to non-controlling interests, net of contributions.Net cash provided by financing activities in the three months ended March 31, 2022 included $68.0 million of net borrowings under our senior credit facility, partially offset by $15.7 million of net repayments of short-term debt, $11.3 million of payments related to tax withholding for share-based compensation, $10.8 million of cash payments for dividends and $9.5 million of cash payments for common stock repurchases.We expect to continue to utilize cash for similar financing activities in the future, including repayments under our senior credit facility and commercial paper program, payment of cash dividends and repurchases of our common stock and/or debt securities.
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our condensed consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Certain information and footnote disclosures, normally included in annual financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP, have been condensed or omitted pursuant to those rules and regulations. The preparation of these condensed consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities known to exist as of the date the condensed consolidated financial statements are published and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses recognized during the periods presented. We review all significant estimates affecting our condensed consolidated financial statements on a recurring basis and record the effect of any necessary adjustments prior to their publication. Judgments and estimates are based on our beliefs and assumptions derived from information available at the time such judgments and estimates are made. Uncertainties with respect to such estimates and assumptions are inherent in the preparation of financial statements. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates. Management has reviewed its development and selection of critical accounting estimates with the audit committee of our Board of Directors. Our accounting policies are primarily described in Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data in Part II of the 2022 Annual Report and should be read in conjunction with the accounting policies identified that we believe affect our more significant judgments and estimates detailed in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of Part II of our 2022 Annual Report.