
Demand for oil throughout the world remains volatile since improving from the COVID-19 pandemic in mid-2020. Worldwide oil inventories have consistently been lower due to limited capital investments directed towards developing incremental oil supplies over the past few years. Sanctions, import bans and price caps on Russian crude oil and petroleum products have been implemented by various countries in response to the war in Ukraine, further impacting global oil supply. In addition, the lingering impacts from the pandemic, combined with the Russia/Ukraine conflict, have resulted in global supply chain disruptions, which have led to significant cost inflation and the potential for a global recession. This uncertainty led OPEC to reduce its oil demand outlook, which led to multiple cuts to its production quotas. As a result of the current global supply and demand uncertainties, average NYMEX oil and NYMEX gas prices for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were $76.21 per Bbl and $3.44 per Mcf, respectively, as compared to $94.29 per Bbl and $4.96 per Mcf, respectively, for the same period in 2022. Global oil price levels and inflationary pressures will ultimately depend on various factors that are beyond the Company's control, such as (i) the ability of OPEC and other oil producing nations to manage the global oil supply, (ii) the impact of sanctions and import bans on production from Russia, (iii) the timing and supply impact of any Iranian sanction relief on their ability to export oil, (iv) the global supply chain constraints associated with manufacturing and distribution delays, (v) oilfield service demand and cost inflation, (vi) political stability of oil consuming countries and (vii) increasing expectations that the world may be heading into a global recession. The Company continues to assess and monitor the impact of these factors and consequences on the Company and its operations.
The Company's financial and operating performance for the three months ended March 31, 2023 included the following highlights:•Net income attributable to common stockholders for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $1.2 billion ($5.00 per diluted share), as compared to net income of $2.0 billion ($7.85 per diluted share) for the same period in 2022. The primary components of the decrease in earnings attributable to common stockholders include:•a $764 million decrease in oil and gas revenues, primarily due to a 25 percent decrease in average realized commodity prices per BOE in 2023 due to the aforementioned instability in worldwide oil, NGL and gas demand, partially offset by a seven percent increase in daily sales volumes due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program; •a $163 million decrease in net interest and other income primarily due to a decrease in the fair value of the Company's investment in affiliate; and•a $119 million decrease in net sales of purchased commodities due to a decline in margins on the Company's downstream Gulf Coast refinery and export oil sales.partially offset by:•a $217 million decrease in income taxes, primarily due to the decrease in earnings in 2023 compared to 2022; and•a $91 million decrease in derivative losses, primarily due to a reduction in the Company's commodity derivative positions.•During the three months ended March 31, 2023, average daily sales volumes increased on a BOE basis by seven percent to 680,440 BOEPD, as compared to 637,756 BOEPD during the same period in 2022.•Average oil and NGL prices per Bbl and average gas prices per Mcf decreased to $75.15, $27.30 and $3.79, respectively, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to $94.60, $41.37 and $4.81, respectively, for the same period in 2022.•Net cash provided by operating activities decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023 to $2.3 billion, as compared to $2.6 billion for the same period in 2022. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to (i) the aforementioned decrease in oil and gas revenues and (ii) an increase in the current income tax provision, partially offset by a decrease in cash used in derivative activities.•During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company declared a base and variable dividend of $1.10 per share and $4.48 per share, respectively, and paid dividends of $1.3 billion, as compared to a declared base and variable dividend of $0.78 per share and $3.00 per share, respectively, and dividend payments of $1.1 billion during the same period in 2022.•During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company repurchased 2.4 million shares for $500 million under the Company's stock repurchase program, as compared to repurchases of 1.1 million shares for $250 million during the same period in 2022.•As of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the Company's net debt to book capitalization was 18 percent and 15 percent, respectively.
Based on current estimates, the Company expects the following operating and financial results for the second quarter of 2023:
(a)The expected cash flow impact from firm transportation is primarily based on (i) the forecasted differential between Midland WTI oil prices and Brent oil prices less the costs to transport purchased oil from the areas of the Company's production to the Gulf Coast and (ii) oil price fluctuations between the time the Company purchases the oil from its areas of operation and when the oil is delivered and sold to Gulf Coast refineries or exported to international markets. To the extent that the Company's Gulf Coast sales of purchased oil does not cover the purchase price and associated firm transport costs, the Company's results of operations will reflect the negative cash flow impact attributable to the shortfall.
Average daily oil, NGL and gas sales volumes are as follows:
The Company's liquids production was 78 percent of total production, on a BOE basis, for the three months ended March 31, 2023.Costs incurred are as follows:
(a)Includes $162 million of noncash acquisition costs related to nonmonetary transactions in which the Company exchanged both proved and unproved oil and gas properties in the Midland Basin with unaffiliated third parties. See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.Development and exploration/extension drilling activity is as follows:
As of March 31, 2023, the Company's drilling and completions program included operating 25 drilling rigs and seven frac fleets in the Midland Basin. The Company will continue to evaluate its drilling and completions program with future activity levels assessed regularly. Pioneer is the largest acreage holder in the Spraberry/Wolfcamp field in the Midland Basin of West Texas. In the southern portion of the Spraberry/Wolfcamp field, the Company has a joint venture ("JV") with Sinochem Petroleum USA LLC, a U.S. subsidiary of the Sinochem Group. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company successfully completed 114 horizontal wells in the non-JV portion of the Midland Basin and 14 horizontal wells in the JV portion of the Midland Basin. In the non-JV portion of the Midland Basin, 38 percent of the horizontal wells placed on production were Spraberry interval wells, 34 percent were Wolfcamp B interval wells and the remaining 28 percent were Wolfcamp A interval wells. In the southern JV portion of the Midland Basin, all of the wells placed on production were Wolfcamp A or B interval wells.
Oil and gas revenues. The Company's oil and gas revenues are derived from sales of oil, NGL and gas production. Increases or decreases in the Company's revenues, profitability and future production are highly dependent on commodity prices. Prices are market driven and future prices will fluctuate due to supply and demand factors, availability of transportation, seasonality, geopolitical developments and economic factors, among other items. Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Oil and gas revenues$3,166 $3,930 $(764)Average daily sales volumes are as follows:
Average daily BOE sales volumes increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program.The oil, NGL and gas prices reported by the Company are based on the market prices received for each commodity. Commodity prices for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, decreased due to the aforementioned instability in worldwide oil, NGL and gas demand. The average prices are as follows:
Net effect from sales of purchased commodities. The Company enters into pipeline capacity commitments in order to secure available oil, NGL and gas transportation capacity from the Company's areas of production and to secure diesel supply from the Gulf Coast. The Company also enters into purchase commitments to secure sand supply for the Company's operations in the Midland Basin. The Company enters into purchase transactions with third parties and separate sale transactions with third parties to diversify a portion of the Company's oil and gas sales to (i) Gulf Coast refineries, (ii) Gulf Coast and West Coast gas markets and (iii) international oil markets, and to satisfy unused gas pipeline capacity commitments. The Company periodically sells diesel and sand to unaffiliated third parties in the Permian Basin if it has supply in excess of its operational needs. Revenues and expenses from these transactions are generally presented on a gross basis in sales of purchased commodities and purchased commodities expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations as the Company acts as a principal in the transaction by assuming both the risks and rewards of ownership, including credit risk, of the commodities purchased and the responsibility to deliver the commodities sold. In conjunction with the Company's downstream sales, the Company also enters into pipeline capacity and storage commitments in order to secure available oil and gas transportation capacity from the Company's areas of production to downstream sales points and storage capacity at downstream sales points. The transportation and storage costs associated with these transactions are included in purchased commodities expense.The net effect from sales of purchased commodities is as follows:
The change in the net effect from sales of purchased commodities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to a decline in margins on the Company's downstream Gulf Coast refinery and export oil sales.Firm transportation payments on excess pipeline capacity are included in other expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. See Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Interest and other income (loss), net$(37)$126 $(163)The change in net interest and other income (loss) for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to (i) changes in the fair value of the Company's investment in affiliate resulting in a noncash loss of $53 million in 2023, as compared to a noncash gain of $96 million in 2022 and (ii) a noncash gain on the Company's short-term investment in Laredo of $18 million in 2022.See Note 4 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Commodity price derivatives. The Company primarily utilizes derivative contracts to reduce the effect of price volatility on the commodities the Company produces and sells. As of March 31, 2023, the Company has outstanding oil derivative contracts for three thousand Bbls per day of Brent/WTI basis swaps for January 2024 through December 2024. The basis swap contracts fix the basis differential between the WTI index price (the price at which the Company buys Midland Basin oil for transport to the Gulf Coast) and the Brent index price (the price at which a portion of the Midland Basin purchased oil is sold in the Gulf Coast market) at a weighted average differential of $4.33.Marketing derivatives. The Company uses marketing derivatives to diversify its oil pricing to Gulf Coast and international markets. As of March 31, 2023, the Company's marketing derivatives reflect long-term marketing contracts whereby the Company agreed to purchase and simultaneously sell, at an oil terminal in Midland, Texas, (i) 50 thousand barrels of oil per day beginning January 1, 2021 and ending December 31, 2026, (ii) 40 thousand barrels of oil per day beginning May 1, 2022 and ending April 30, 2027 and (iii) 30 thousand barrels of oil per day beginning August 1, 2022 and ending July 31, 2027.The price the Company pays to purchase the oil volumes under the purchase contract is based on a Midland WTI price and the price the Company receives for the oil volumes sold is the WASP that a non-affiliated counterparty receives for selling oil through a Gulf Coast storage and export facility at prices that are highly correlated with Brent oil prices during the same month of the purchase. Based on the form of the long-term marketing contracts, the Company accounts for the contracts as derivative instruments not designated as hedges.Conversion option derivatives. As of March 31, 2023, the Company's Convertible Notes have an outstanding principal balance of $870 million. Certain holders of the Convertible Notes exercised their conversion option during the three months ended March 31, 2023. Per the terms of the notes indenture, the Company elected to settle the conversions in cash at the end of the Settlement Period. The Company's election to settle an exercised conversion option in cash results in a forward contract during the Settlement Period that is accounted for as a derivative instrument not designated as a hedge. The Company's conversion option derivatives represent the change in the cash settlement obligation that occurs during the Settlement Period related to conversion options exercised by certain holders of the Company's Convertible Notes.The Company's open derivative contracts are subject to market risk. See "Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk" and Note 4 and Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Gain on disposition of assets, net$25 $34 $(9)The net gain on disposition of assets for the three months ended March 31, 2023 is primarily due to nonmonetary transactions in which the Company exchanged both proved and unproved oil and gas properties in the Midland Basin with unaffiliated third parties. Certain of these transactions were accounted for at fair value, resulting in the Company recording a gain of $24 million.The net gain on disposition of assets for three months ended March 31, 2022 is primarily due to the divestment of certain undeveloped acreage and producing wells in the Midland Basin for cash proceeds of $85 million, resulting in a gain on the divestiture of $41 million.See Note 3 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Oil and gas production costs$455 $416 $39 Total production costs per BOE are as follows:
(a)Lease operating expense and workover costs represent the components of oil and gas production costs over which the Company has management control.(b)Gathering, processing and transportation expense represents the costs to (i) gather, process, transport and fractionate the Company's gas and NGLs to a point of sale and, to a lesser extent, (ii) gather and transport certain of the Company's oil production to a point of sale.(c)Net natural gas plant income represents the earnings from the Company's ownership share of gas processing facilities that gather and process the Company's and third party gas.The change in the Company's production costs per BOE during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is due to the following:•Lease operating expense per BOE increased primarily due to inflationary pressures on power, chemicals and labor costs;•Gathering, processing and transportation expense per BOE decreased primarily due to decreased gas processing costs as a result of a decrease in gas and NGL prices, which are used to value contractual volumes retained by the gas processor as payment for their services;•Workover costs per BOE increased due to increased workover costs due to inflationary pressures; and•Net natural gas plant income per BOE decreased primarily due to decreases in gas and NGL prices.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Production and ad valorem taxes$208 $224 $(16)Production and ad valorem taxes per BOE are as follows:
In general, production taxes and ad valorem taxes are directly related to commodity price changes; however, Texas ad valorem taxes are based upon prior year commodity prices, whereas production taxes are based upon current year commodity prices.The change in production taxes per BOE for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is due to the aforementioned decrease in commodity prices. The change in ad valorem taxes per BOE for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to an increase in prior year commodity prices that are used to determine current year ad valorem taxes.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Depletion, depreciation and amortization$664 $614 $50 Total DD&A expense per BOE is as follows:
The change in DD&A and depletion expense per BOE for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to an increase in capital costs due to inflation which marginally exceeded proved reserve additions.
The change in geological and geophysical costs for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to $2 million for licensing of certain seismic data in the Company's area of operations. Leasehold abandonment costs primarily represent the abandonment of certain unproved properties that the Company no longer plans to drill before the leases expire.During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, the Company drilled and evaluated 123 and 122 exploratory/extension wells, respectively, with 100 percent successfully completed as discoveries.See Note 6 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Total general and administrative expense per BOE is as follows:
The change in cash general and administrative expense per BOE for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to the aforementioned seven percent increase in daily sales volumes due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program, partially offset by increases in labor costs. The change in noncash general and administrative expense per BOE for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to changes in the market value of investments underlying the Company's deferred compensation obligation.
The change in cash interest expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to (i) the early extinguishment of the Company's 0.750% senior notes due 2024 and the 4.450% senior notes due 2026 during February 2022, (ii) the repayment of the Company's 3.950% senior notes due 2022 that matured in July 2022 and (iii) the early extinguishment of the Company's 5.625% senior notes due 2027 during October 2022.The weighted average cash interest rate on the Company's indebtedness for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased to 1.7 percent, as compared to 1.8 percent for the same period in 2022.See Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Three Months Ended March 31,20232022Change(in millions)Other expense$41 $77 $(36)The change in other expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to (i) $47 million in losses attributable to the early extinguishment of the Company's 0.750% senior notes due 2024 and 4.450% senior notes due 2026 during 2022, partially offset by $11 million in impairment expense to adjust the carrying values of two unoccupied field offices to their estimated sales prices during 2023.See Note 4 and Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
The change in income tax provision for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to a decrease of $1.0 billion in income before income taxes. The Company evaluates and updates its annual effective income tax rate on an interim basis based on current and forecasted earnings and tax laws. The mix and timing of the Company's actual earnings compared to annual projections can cause interim effective tax rate fluctuations. The Company's interim effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 differed from the U.S. statutory rate of 21 percent primarily due to forecasted state income taxes.On August 16, 2022, President Biden signed into law the IRA, which includes among other things, the CAMT. Under the CAMT, a 15 percent minimum tax will be imposed on certain adjusted financial statement income of "applicable corporations," which is effective for tax years beginning after December 31,2022. The CAMT generally treats a corporation as an "applicable corporation" in any taxable year in which the "average annual adjusted financial statement income" of the corporation and certain of its subsidiaries and affiliates for a three-taxable-year period ending prior to such taxable year exceeds $1 billion. The Company will continue to monitor and assess any impacts of the IRA on the Company's current year tax provision or the Company's consolidated financial statements.See Note 14 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.
Liquidity. The Company's primary sources of short-term liquidity are (i) cash and cash equivalents, (ii) net cash provided by operating activities, (iii) sales of investments, (iv) unused borrowing capacity under its Credit Facility, (v) issuances of debt or equity securities and (vi) other sources, such as sales of nonstrategic assets.The Company's short-term and long-term liquidity requirements consist primarily of (i) capital expenditures, (ii) acquisitions of oil and gas properties, (iii) payments of contractual obligations, including debt maturities, (iv) dividends and share repurchases, (v) income taxes and (vi) working capital obligations. Funding for these requirements may be provided by any combination of the Company's sources of liquidity. Although the Company expects that its sources of funding will be adequate to fund its 2023 liquidity requirements, no assurance can be given that such funding sources will be adequate to meet the Company's future needs.2023 capital budget. The Company's capital budget for 2023 is expected to be in the range of (i) $4.45 billion to $4.75 billion of development related capital, which includes drilling and completion related activities, and the construction of tank batteries, saltwater disposal facilities and water infrastructure, and (ii) $150 million to $200 million of exploration, environmental and other capital, principally related to drilling four Barnett/Woodford formation wells in the Midland Basin, additional testing of the Company's enhanced oil recovery project and adding electric power infrastructure for future drilling, completions and production operations. The 2023 capital budget excludes acquisitions, asset retirement obligations, capitalized interest, geological and geophysical general and administrative expense, corporate facilities and vehicles. The 2023 capital budget is expected to be funded from operating cash flow and, if necessary, from cash and cash equivalents on hand or borrowings under the Company's Credit Facility.Capital resources. As of March 31, 2023, the Company had no outstanding borrowings under its Credit Facility, leaving $2.0 billion of unused borrowing capacity. The Credit Facility requires the maintenance of a ratio of total debt to book capitalization, subject to certain adjustments, not to exceed 0.65 to 1.0. The Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants as of March 31, 2023. The Company also had unrestricted cash on hand of $1.2 billion as of March 31, 2023. Sources and uses of cash during the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, are as follows:
Operating activities. The change in net cash flow provided by operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, is primarily due to (i) a decrease in oil and gas revenues, primarily due to a 25 percent decrease in average realized commodity prices per BOE in 2023 due to the aforementioned instability in worldwide oil and gas demand, partially offset by a seven percent increase in daily sales volumes due to the Company's successful Spraberry/Wolfcamp horizontal drilling program and (ii) an increase in the current income tax provision, partially offset by a decrease in cash used in derivative activities.Investing activities. The Company's significant investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are as follows:•2023: The Company (i) used $1.2 billion for additions to oil and gas properties, (ii) used $28 million for additions to other assets and other property, plant and equipment and (iii) received proceeds from disposition of assets of $4 million.•2022: The Company (i) used $914 million for additions to oil and gas properties, (ii) purchased commercial paper for $640 million, net of $2 million of discounts, (iii) received proceeds from the disposition of assets of $210 million, (iv) received proceeds from the sale of the short-term investment in Laredo common stock of $75 million and (v) used $41 million for additions to other assets and other property, plant and equipment.Financing activities. The Company's significant financing activities for the years ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are as follows:•2023: The Company (i) paid dividends of $1.3 billion, (ii) received proceeds from the March 2023 Senior Notes Offering, net of $7 million of issuance costs and discounts, of $1.1 billion, (iii) repurchased $520 million of its common stock, (iv) borrowed and repaid $350 million on its Credit Facility, (v) paid $230 million to settle exercised conversion options related to the Company's Convertible Notes, (vi) received $31 million in Capped Call proceeds related to the aforementioned exercised conversion options and (vii) paid $4 million of other liabilities.•2022: The Company (i) redeemed $1.3 billion of its outstanding 0.750% senior notes due 2024 and 4.450% senior notes due 2026, having aggregate principal amounts of $750 million and $500 million, respectively, (ii) paid dividends of $1.1 billion, (iii) repurchased $276 million of its common stock and (iv) paid $121 million of other liabilities.Dividends. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company declared base dividends of $260 million, or $1.10 per share, compared to $191 million, or $0.78 per share, during the three months ended March 31, 2022. In addition to its base dividend program, the Company has a variable dividend strategy whereby the Company pays a quarterly variable dividend of up to 75 percent of the prior quarter's free cash flow remaining after its base dividend. In April 2023, the Company modified its variable dividend strategy to return 75 percent of the prior quarter's free cash flow inclusive of its base dividend and share repurchases. The modified variable dividend strategy will be effective for variable dividends declared by the Board subsequent to April 2023. Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure. As used by the Company, free cash flow is defined as net cash provided by operating activities, adjusted for changes in operating assets and liabilities, less capital expenditures. The Company believes this non-GAAP measure is a financial indicator of the Company's ability to internally fund acquisitions, debt maturities, dividends and share repurchases after capital expenditures. Capital expenditures exclude acquisitions, asset retirement obligations, capitalized interest, geological and geophysical general and administrative expenses, information technology capital investments, vehicles and additions to corporate facilities. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company declared variable dividends of $1.1 billion, or $4.48 per share, compared to $731 million, or $3.00 per share, during the three months ended March 31, 2022.On April 26, 2023, the Board declared a quarterly base dividend of $1.25 per share and a quarterly variable dividend of $2.09 per share for shareholders of record on June 1, 2023, with a payment date of June 21, 2023. Future base and variable dividends are at the discretion of the Board, and, if declared, the Board may change the dividend amount based on the Company's outlook for commodity prices, liquidity, debt levels, capital resources, free cash flow or other factors. The Company can provide no assurance that dividends will be authorized or declared in the future or as to the amount of any future dividends. Any future variable dividends, if declared and paid, will fluctuate based on the Company's free cash flow and share repurchases, which will depend on a number of factors beyond the Company's control, including commodity prices and the Company's share price.Off-balance sheet arrangements. From time to time, the Company enters into arrangements and transactions that can give rise to material off-balance sheet obligations of the Company. As of March 31, 2023, the material off-balance sheet arrangements and transactions that the Company had entered into included (i) firm purchase, transportation, storage and fractionation commitments, (ii) open purchase commitments and (iii) contractual obligations for which the ultimate settlement amounts are not fixed and determinable. The contractual obligations for which the ultimate settlement amounts are not fixed and determinable include (a) derivative contracts that are sensitive to future changes in commodity prices, or the Company's share price, (b) gathering, processing and transportation commitments on uncertain volumes of future throughput and (c) indemnification obligations following certain divestitures.In connection with its divestiture transactions, the Company may retain certain liabilities and provide the purchaser certain indemnifications, subject to defined limitations, which may apply to identified pre-closing matters, including matters of litigation, environmental contingencies, royalties and income taxes. Also associated with its divestiture transactions, the Company has issued and received guarantees to facilitate the transfer of contractual obligations, such as firm transportation agreements or gathering and processing arrangements. The Company does not recognize a liability if the fair value of the obligation is immaterial or the likelihood of making payments under these guarantees is remote.Other than the off-balance sheet arrangements described above, the Company has no transactions, arrangements or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons that are reasonably likely to materially affect the Company's liquidity or availability of or requirements for capital resources. The Company expects to enter into similar contractual arrangements in the future and additional firm purchase, transportation, storage and fractionation arrangements, in order to support the Company's business plans. See Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.Convertible senior notes. In May 2020, the Company issued $1.3 billion principal amount of convertible senior notes due 2025. The Convertible Notes bear a fixed interest rate of 0.250% per year, with interest payable on May 15 and November 15 of each year. The Convertible Notes will mature on May 15, 2025, unless earlier redeemed, repurchased or converted. The Convertible Notes are unsecured obligations ranking equally in right of payment with all other senior unsecured indebtedness of the Company.The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of the Company's common stock at an adjusted conversion rate of 10.5356 shares of the Company's common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes subject to the Conversion Rate, which represents an adjusted Conversion Price of $94.92 per share as of March 31, 2023. As a result of the quarterly base and variable dividends declared through March 31, 2023, the Conversion Rate increased from the initial rate of 9.1098 shares of the Company's common stock per $1,000 principal amount of the Convertible Notes and the Conversion Price decreased from $109.77. Future declarations of quarterly base and variable dividends in excess of $0.55 per common share will cause further adjustments to the Conversion Rate and the Conversion Price pursuant to the terms of the notes indenture. Upon conversion, the Convertible Notes may be settled in cash, shares of the Company's common stock or a combination thereof, at the Company's election. Holders of the Convertible Notes may convert their notes at their option prior to February 15, 2025 under the following circumstances:•during the quarter following any quarter during which the last reported sales price of the Company's common stock for at least 20 of the last 30 consecutive trading days of such quarter exceeds 130 percent of the Conversion Price;•during the five-day period following any five consecutive trading day period when the trading price of the Convertible Notes is less than 98 percent of the product of the last reported sales price of the Company's common stock and the Conversion Rate; •upon notice of redemption by the Company; or•upon the occurrence of specified corporate events, including certain consolidations or mergers.On or after February 15, 2025, until the close of business on the second scheduled trading day immediately preceding the maturity date, holders may convert their notes at any time. The Company may not redeem the Convertible Notes prior to May 20, 2023, and after such date, may redeem the Convertible Notes only if the last reported sale price of the Company's common stock has been at least 130 percent of the Conversion Price for at least 20 trading days (whether or not consecutive) during any 30 consecutive trading day period ending on, and including, the trading day immediately preceding the date on which the Company provides the notice of redemption. The redemption price is equal to 100 percent of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes to be redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest.During the last 30 consecutive trading days of the first quarter of 2023, the last reported sales prices of the Company's common stock exceeded 130 percent of the Conversion Price for at least 20 trading days, causing the Convertible Notes to become convertible at the option of the holders during the three month period ending June 30, 2023. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company made total cash payments of $223 million related to the settlement of exercised conversion options on its Convertible Notes. As of March 31, 2023, $65 million of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes remains in the Settlement Period. The Company reserves its right under the notes indenture to elect to settle the Convertible Notes in cash, shares of the Company's common stock or a combination of cash and common stock. See Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.Contractual obligations. The Company's contractual obligations include long-term debt, leases (primarily related to contracted drilling rigs, office facilities and other equipment), capital funding obligations, derivative obligations, firm transportation, storage and fractionation commitments, minimum annual gathering, processing and transportation commitments and other liabilities. Other joint owners in the properties operated by the Company could incur portions of the costs represented by these commitments.Firm commitments. The Company has short-term and long-term firm purchase, gathering, processing, transportation, fractionation and storage commitments representing take-or-pay agreements, which include contractual commitments (i) to purchase sand, water and diesel for use in the Company's drilling and completion operations, (ii) with midstream service companies and pipeline carriers for future gathering, processing, transportation, fractionation and storage and (iii) with oilfield services companies that provide drilling and pressure pumping services. The Company does not expect to be able to fulfill all of its short-term and long-term firm transportation volume obligations from projected production of available reserves; consequently, the Company plans to purchase third party volumes to satisfy its firm transportation commitments if it is economic to do so; otherwise, it will pay demand fees for any commitment shortfalls. The Company also has open purchase commitments for inventories, materials and other property and equipment ordered, but not received, as of March 31, 2023. Long-term debt. As of March 31, 2023, the Company's outstanding debt is comprised of senior notes and convertible senior notes. The senior notes and convertible senior notes issued by the Company rank equally, but are structurally subordinated to all obligations of the Company's subsidiaries. See Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.Operating leases. The Company's short-term and long-term lease obligations primarily relate to contracted drilling rigs, storage tanks, equipment and office facilities.Derivative obligations. The Company's commodity, marketing and conversion option derivatives are periodically measured and recorded at fair value and continue to be subject to market and/or credit risk. As of March 31, 2023, these contracts represented net liabilities of $175 million. The ultimate liquidation value of the Company's commodity and marketing derivatives will be dependent upon actual future commodity prices, which may differ materially from the inputs used to determine the derivatives' fair values as of March 31, 2023. The ultimate liquidation of the Company's conversion option derivatives will be dependent on the Company's daily volumetric weighted average share price during the Settlement Period. See Note 4 and Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" and "Item 3. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk" for additional information.Other liabilities. The Company's other liabilities represent current and noncurrent other liabilities that are primarily comprised of litigation and environmental contingencies, asset retirement obligations, a finance lease for the corporate headquarters office building, the deferred compensation retirement plan obligation and other obligations for which neither the ultimate settlement amounts nor their timings can be precisely determined in advance. See Note 9 and Note 10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in "Item 1. Financial Statements" for additional information.