
The following Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to help the reader understand the consolidated results of operations and financial condition of Qorvo, Inc. and Subsidiaries (together, the "Company" or "Qorvo").  MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.Qorvo® is a global leader in the development and commercialization of technologies and products for wireless, wired and power markets.During the second quarter of fiscal 2023, we updated our organizational structure to more closely align technologies and applications with customers and end markets.  Prior to this organizational change, we operated under two segments (Mobile Products ("MP") and Infrastructure and Defense Products ("IDP")) and subsequent to this organizational change, we are operating under three segments (High Performance Analog ("HPA"), Connectivity and Sensors Group ("CSG") and Advanced Cellular Group ("ACG").  Refer to Note 10 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our reportable operating segments as of July 1, 2023.HPA is a leading global supplier of radio frequency ("RF") and power solutions for automotive, defense and aerospace, cellular infrastructure, broadband and other markets.  HPA leverages a diverse portfolio of differentiated technologies and products to support multiyear growth trends, including electrification, renewable energy, the increasing semiconductor spend in defense and 5G deployments.CSG is a leading global supplier of connectivity and sensor solutions, with broad expertise spanning ultra-wideband, Matter®, Bluetooth® Low Energy, Zigbee®, Thread®, Wi-Fi®, cellular Internet of Things, microelectromechanical system-based sensors and bulk acoustic wave-based sensors.  CSG combines the connectivity and sensors businesses formerly split between MP and IDP.  CSG’s markets include home and consumer electronics, industrial automation, automotive, smartphones, wearables, and industrial and enterprise access points. ACG is a leading global supplier of cellular RF solutions for smartphones, wearables, laptops, tablets and other devices.  ACG leverages world-class technology and systems-level expertise to deliver a broad portfolio of high performance cellular products to the world's leading smartphone and consumer electronics companies.  ACG is a highly diversified supplier of custom and open market cellular solutions, serving iOS and Android original equipment manufacturers.
•Revenue for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 decreased 37.1% as compared to the first quarter of fiscal 2023, primarily due to challenges in the global macroeconomic environment which negatively impacted end market demand for smartphones and products in other markets including Wi-Fi, cellular infrastructure and power management.  Revenue was also negatively impacted by ongoing efforts to reduce channel inventories.•Gross margin for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 decreased to 35.2% as compared to 36.2% for the first quarter of fiscal 2023, primarily due to factory underutilization resulting from lower production levels, restructuring charges and average selling price erosion.    •Operating loss was $48.1 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 as compared to operating income of $101.9 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.  This decrease was primarily due to lower revenue and lower gross margin.•Net loss per share was $0.44 for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 as compared to net income per diluted share of $0.65 for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.•Capital expenditures were $39.5 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 as compared to $43.5 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.
The following table presents a summary of our results of operations (in thousands, except percentages):
Revenue decreased primarily due to challenges in the global macroeconomic environment which negatively impacted end market demand for smartphones and products in other markets including Wi-Fi, cellular infrastructure and power management.  Revenue was also negatively impacted by ongoing efforts to reduce channel inventories. Gross margin decreased primarily due to factory underutilization resulting from lower production levels, restructuring charges and average selling price erosion.  In fiscal 2022, we entered into a long-term capacity reservation agreement with a foundry supplier to purchase a certain number of wafers through calendar year 2025.  In fiscal 2023, the agreement was amended and the term was extended through calendar year 2026.  In the first quarter of fiscal 2023, we recorded charges of $110.0 million to cost of goods sold based on our actual and estimated purchase shortfalls.  In the first quarter of fiscal 2024, no charges were recorded to the statement of operations as a result of this agreement.Operating expenses increased primarily due to employee-related costs and restructuring charges.  Refer to Note 9 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on restructuring charges.
HPA revenue decreased primarily due to challenges in the global macroeconomic environment which negatively impacted end market demand for products in the cellular infrastructure and power management markets, including products supporting solid-state drives and power tools.  Revenue was also negatively impacted by ongoing efforts to reduce channel inventories.  HPA operating income decreased primarily due to lower revenue and inventory related charges.
CSG revenue decreased primarily due to challenges in the global macroeconomic environment which negatively impacted end market demand for Wi-Fi components.  Revenue was also negatively impacted by ongoing efforts to reduce channel inventories. CSG operating income decreased primarily due to lower revenue, factory underutilization, average selling price erosion, and to a lesser extent, increased operating expenses primarily due to employee-related costs.
ACG revenue decreased primarily due to challenges in the global macroeconomic environment which negatively impacted end market demand for smartphones.  Revenue was also negatively impacted by ongoing efforts to reduce channel inventories.  ACG operating income decreased primarily due to lower revenue, average selling price erosion and factory underutilization.
During the three months ended July 1, 2023 and July 2, 2022, we recorded interest expense primarily related to our 1.750% senior notes due 2024 (the "2024 Notes"), our 4.375% senior notes due 2029 (the "2029 Notes") and our 3.375% senior notes due 2031 (the "2031 Notes").  Refer to Note 5 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
During the three months ended July 1, 2023, we recorded interest income of $8.2 million and net gains of $4.6 million from our share of the earnings from our limited partnership investments and other investments.  During the three months ended July 2, 2022, we recorded interest income of $1.7 million and net losses of $6.6 million from our share of the losses from our limited partnership investments and other investments.
During the three months ended July 1, 2023, we recorded an income tax benefit of $8.1 million, comprised primarily of tax benefits related to domestic and international operations generating pre-tax book losses and domestic tax credits, partially offset by tax expense related to international operations generating pre-tax book income and the impact of global intangible low tax income ("GILTI").During the three months ended July 2, 2022, we recorded income tax expense of $10.7 million, comprised primarily of tax expense related to international operations generating pre-tax book income and the impact of GILTI, partially offset by tax benefits related to domestic and international operations generating pre-tax book losses, domestic tax credits generated and discrete tax items recorded during the period.  The discrete tax benefit primarily resulted from certain charges associated with a long-term capacity reservation agreement recorded during the period.A valuation allowance remained against certain domestic and foreign net deferred tax assets as it is more likely than not that the related deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Cash generated by operations is our primary source of liquidity.  As of July 1, 2023, we had working capital of approximately $1,448.8 million, including $744.4 million in cash and cash equivalents, compared to working capital of approximately $1,474.0 million, including $808.8 million in cash and cash equivalents as of April 1, 2023.Our $744.4 million of total cash and cash equivalents as of July 1, 2023, includes approximately $569.5 million held by our foreign subsidiaries, of which $368.6 million is held by Qorvo International Pte. Ltd. in Singapore.  If the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are needed in the U.S., we may be required to pay state income and/or foreign local withholding taxes to repatriate these earnings.
During the three months ended July 1, 2023, we repurchased approximately 1.0 million shares of our common stock for approximately $100.6 million (including transaction costs and excise tax) under our share repurchase program.  As of July 1, 2023, approximately $1,605.0 million remains available for repurchases under the program.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $44.9 million and $273.0 million for the three months ended July 1, 2023 and July 2, 2022, respectively.  This decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to decreased profitability, partially offset by changes in working capital.
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.9 million and $38.9 million for the three months ended July 1, 2023 and July 2, 2022, respectively.  During the three months ended July 1, 2023, we received proceeds of $41.7 million from sales of property and equipment.
Net cash used in financing activities was $105.2 million and $345.9 million for the three months ended July 1, 2023 and July 2, 2022, respectively, primarily due to our stock repurchases.  Refer to Note 6 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our stock repurchases.
Credit Agreement On September 29, 2020, we and certain of our U.S. subsidiaries (the "Guarantors") entered into a five-year unsecured senior credit facility pursuant to a credit agreement (as amended, restated, modified or otherwise supplemented from time to time, the "Credit Agreement") with Bank of America, N.A., acting as administrative agent, and a syndicate of lenders.  The Credit Agreement amended and restated the previous credit agreement dated as of December 5, 2017.  The Credit Agreement includes a senior revolving line of credit (the "Revolving Facility") of up to $300.0 million, and included a senior term loan that was fully repaid in fiscal 2022.  The Revolving Facility is available to finance working capital, capital expenditures and other general corporate purposes.Pursuant to the Credit Agreement, we may request one or more additional tranches of term loans or increases to the Revolving Facility, up to an aggregate of $500.0 million and subject to, among other things, securing additional funding commitments from the existing or new lenders.On June 23, 2023, we entered into a second amendment to the Credit Agreement (the "Second Amendment").  The purpose of the Second Amendment was to amend certain covenants related to our ratio of Consolidated Funded Indebtedness to Consolidated EBITDA, as such terms are defined in the Credit Agreement (the "Consolidated Leverage Ratio").  The Second Amendment increases the maximum Consolidated Leverage Ratio to 4.00 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ended July 1, 2023 and ending September 30, 2023, and 3.50 to 1.00 for the fiscal quarters ending December 30, 2023 and March 30, 2024.During the three months ended July 1, 2023, there were no borrowings under the Revolving Facility.The Credit Agreement contains various conditions, covenants and representations with which we must be in compliance in order to borrow funds and to avoid an event of default.  As of July 1, 2023, we were in compliance with these covenants.  2024 Notes  On December 14, 2021, we issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2024 Notes.  Interest on the 2024 Notes is payable on June 15 and December 15 of each year at a rate of 1.750% per annum.  The 2024 Notes will mature on December 15, 2024, unless earlier redeemed in accordance with their terms.  The 2024 Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed, jointly and severally, by the Guarantors.2029 Notes  On September 30, 2019, we issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of our senior notes due 2029.  On December 20, 2019, and June 11, 2020, we issued an additional $200.0 million and $300.0 million, respectively, aggregate principal amount of 2029 Notes.  Interest on the 2029 Notes is payable on April 15 and October 15 of each year at a rate of 4.375% per annum.  The 2029 Notes will mature on October 15, 2029, unless earlier redeemed in accordance with their terms.  The 2029 Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed, jointly and severally, by the Guarantors.2031 Notes  On September 29, 2020, we issued $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of our 2031 Notes.  Interest on the 2031 Notes is payable on April 1 and October 1 of each year at a rate of 3.375% per annum.  The 2031 Notes will mature on April 1, 2031, unless earlier redeemed in accordance with their terms.  The 2031 Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and are guaranteed, jointly and severally, by the Guarantors.
Capital Commitments  As of July 1, 2023, we had capital commitments of approximately $74.7 million primarily for expanding capability to support new products, equipment and facility upgrades and cost savings initiatives.Future Sources of Funding  Our future capital requirements may differ materially from those currently projected and will depend on many factors, including market acceptance of, and demand for, our products, acquisition opportunities, technological advances and our relationships with suppliers and customers.  Based on current and projected levels of cash flows from operations, coupled with our existing cash, cash equivalents and our Revolving Facility, we believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet both our short-term and long-term cash requirements.  However, if there is a significant decrease in demand for our products, or if our demand grows faster than we anticipate, operating cash flows may be insufficient to meet our needs.  If existing resources and cash from operations are not sufficient to meet our future requirements or if we perceive conditions to be favorable, we may seek additional debt or equity financing.  Additional debt or equity financing could be dilutive to holders of our common stock.  Further, we cannot be sure that any additional debt or equity financing, if required, will be available on favorable terms, if at all.Legal We are involved in various legal proceedings and claims that have arisen in the ordinary course of business that have not been fully adjudicated.  We accrue a liability for legal contingencies when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated.  We regularly evaluate developments in our legal matters that could affect the amount of the previously accrued liability and record adjustments as appropriate.  Although it is not possible to predict with certainty the outcome of the unresolved legal matters, it is the opinion of management that these matters will not, individually or in the aggregate, have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial position or results of operations.  We believe the aggregate range of reasonably possible losses in excess of accrued liabilities, if any, associated with these unresolved legal matters is not material.Taxes  We are subject to income and other taxes in the United States and in numerous foreign jurisdictions.  Our domestic and foreign tax liabilities are subject to the allocation of revenues and expenses in different jurisdictions.  Additionally, the amount of taxes paid is subject to our interpretation of applicable tax laws in the jurisdictions in which we operate.  We are subject to audits by tax authorities.  While we endeavor to comply with all applicable tax laws, there can be no assurance that a governing tax authority will not have a different interpretation of the law than we do or that we will comply in all respects with applicable tax laws, which could result in additional taxes.  There can be no assurance that the outcomes from tax audits will not have an adverse effect on our results of operations in the period during which the review is conducted.
In accordance with the indentures governing the 2024 Notes, the 2029 Notes and the 2031 Notes (together, the "Notes"), our obligations under the Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a joint and several unsecured basis by the Guarantors, which are listed on Exhibit 22 to this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.  Each Guarantor is 100% owned, directly or indirectly, by Qorvo, Inc. ("Parent").  A Guarantor can be released in certain customary circumstances.  Our other U.S. subsidiaries and our non-U.S. subsidiaries do not guarantee the Notes (such subsidiaries are referred to as the "Non-Guarantors").The following presents summarized financial information for the Parent and the Guarantors on a combined basis as of and for the periods indicated, after eliminating (i) intercompany transactions and balances among the Parent and the Guarantors, and (ii) equity earnings from, and investments in, any Non-Guarantor.  The summarized financial information may not necessarily be indicative of the financial position and results of operations had the combined Parent and Guarantors operated independently from the Non-Guarantors.
(1) Includes net amounts due from Non-Guarantor subsidiaries of $430.5 million and $379.5 million as of July 1, 2023 and April 1, 2023, respectively.(2) Includes net amounts due to Non-Guarantor subsidiaries of $542.3 million and $509.1 million as of July 1, 2023 and April 1, 2023, respectively.