
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is a fully integrated biotechnology company that invents, develops, manufactures, and commercializes medicines for people with serious diseases. Our products and product candidates in development are designed to help patients with eye diseases, allergic and inflammatory diseases, cancer, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, pain, hematologic conditions, infectious diseases, and rare diseases.   Our core business strategy is to maintain a strong foundation in basic scientific research and discovery-enabling technologies, and to build on that foundation with our clinical development, manufacturing, and commercial capabilities. Our objective is to continue to advance as an integrated, multi-product biotechnology company that provides patients and medical professionals with important medicines for preventing and treating human diseases.Selected financial information is summarized as follows:
For purposes of this report, references to our products encompass products marketed or otherwise commercialized by us and/or our collaborators or licensees and references to our product candidates encompass product candidates in development by us and/or our collaborators or licensees (in the case of collaborated or licensed products or product candidates under the terms of the applicable collaboration or license agreements), unless otherwise stated or required by the context.
Products that have received marketing approval are summarized in the table below.
Net product sales of Regeneron-discovered products consist of the following:
Product candidates in clinical development, which are being developed by us and/or our collaborators, are summarized in the table below.There are numerous uncertainties associated with drug development, including uncertainties related to safety and efficacy data from each phase of drug development (including any post-approval studies), uncertainties related to the enrollment and performance of clinical trials, changes in regulatory requirements, changes to drug pricing and reimbursement regulations and requirements, and changes in the competitive landscape affecting a product candidate. The planning, execution, and results of our clinical programs are significant factors that can affect our operating and financial results.Refer to Part II, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" for a description of risks and uncertainties that may affect our clinical programs. Any of such risks and uncertainties may, among other matters, negatively impact the development timelines set forth in the table below.
In March 2023, the Company and Sanofi announced that the primary and all key secondary endpoints were met in the BOREAS trial (the first of two Phase 3 trials) in adults currently on maximal standard-of-care inhaled therapy (triple therapy) with uncontrolled COPD and evidence of type 2 inflammation. In this trial, patients receiving Dupixent experienced a 30% reduction in moderate or severe acute COPD exacerbations (rapid and acute worsening of respiratory symptoms) over 52 weeks, while also demonstrating significant improvements in lung function, quality of life, and COPD respiratory symptoms. The safety results were generally consistent with the known safety profile of Dupixent in its approved indications.
We are collaborating with Sanofi on the global development and commercialization of Dupixent, Kevzara, and itepekimab (the "Antibody Collaboration"). Under the terms of the Antibody License and Collaboration Agreement (the "LCA"), Sanofi is generally responsible for funding 80% to 100% of agreed-upon development costs. We are obligated to reimburse Sanofi for 30% to 50% of worldwide development expenses that were funded by Sanofi based on our share of collaboration profits from commercialization of collaboration products; as of December 31, 2022, the total amount of our contingent reimbursement obligation to Sanofi in connection with such development expenses was approximately $2.9 billion. Under the terms of the LCA, we were required to apply 10% of our share of the profits from the Antibody Collaboration in any calendar quarter to reimburse Sanofi for these development costs. On July 1, 2022, an amendment to the LCA became effective, pursuant to which the percentage of Regeneron’s share of profits used to reimburse Sanofi for such development costs increased from 10% to 20%. Under our collaboration agreement, Sanofi records product sales for commercialized products, and Regeneron has the right to co-commercialize such products on a country-by-country basis. We co-commercialize Dupixent in the United States and in certain countries outside the United States. We supply certain commercial bulk product to Sanofi. We and Sanofi equally share profits and losses from sales within the United States. We and Sanofi share profits outside the United States on a sliding scale based on sales starting at 65% (Sanofi)/35% (us) and ending at 55% (Sanofi)/45% (us), and share losses outside the United States at 55% (Sanofi)/45% (us). In each of 2020 and 2021, we earned a $50.0 million sales-based milestone from Sanofi, upon aggregate annual sales of antibodies outside the United States (including Praluent) exceeding $1.0 billion and $1.5 billion, respectively, on a rolling twelve-month basis. In 2022, we earned two additional $50.0 million sales-based milestones, upon aggregate annual sales of antibodies outside the United States (including Praluent) exceeding $2.0 billion and $2.5 billion, respectively, on a rolling twelve-month basis. We are entitled to receive the final sales milestone payment of $50.0 million when such sales outside the United States exceed $3.0 billion on a rolling twelve-month basis.
We previously collaborated with Sanofi for antibody-based cancer treatments in the field of immuno-oncology (the "IO Collaboration"). Under the terms of the Immuno-oncology License and Collaboration Agreement, the parties were co-developing and co-commercializing Libtayo. The parties shared equally, on an ongoing basis, development and commercialization expenses for Libtayo. We had principal control over the development of Libtayo and led commercialization activities in the United States, while Sanofi led commercialization activities outside of the United States. The parties shared equally in profits and losses in connection with the commercialization of Libtayo.Effective July 1, 2022, the Company obtained the exclusive right to develop, commercialize, and manufacture Libtayo worldwide under an Amended and Restated Immuno-oncology License and Collaboration Agreement with Sanofi (the "A&R IO LCA"). In connection with the A&R IO LCA, in 2022, the Company made a $900.0 million up-front payment to Sanofi, as well as a $100.0 million regulatory milestone payment. In addition, Sanofi earned a $65.0 million sales-based milestone upon the achievement of a specified amount of worldwide net product sales of Libtayo in 2022 and is eligible to receive an additional $35.0 million sales-based milestone upon the achievement of a specified amount of worldwide net product sales of Libtayo in 2023. We also pay Sanofi an 11% royalty on net product sales of Libtayo through March 31, 2034. The parties have also entered into a transition services agreement, a transitional distribution agreement, and a manufacturing services agreement, pursuant to which, during certain transitional periods, Sanofi will perform for Regeneron certain transition, distribution, and manufacturing services, respectively.Under the Amended and Restated Immuno-oncology Discovery and Development Agreement, we were obligated to reimburse Sanofi for half of the development costs it funded that were attributable to clinical development of product candidates from our share of profits from commercialized IO Collaboration products. Under the A&R IO LCA, the amount of development costs incurred under the IO Collaboration for which we are obligated to reimburse Sanofi was $35.0 million as of the effective date of the A&R IO LCA, and we pay Sanofi a 0.5% royalty on net product sales of Libtayo until all such development costs have been reimbursed by us.
We and Bayer are parties to a license and collaboration agreement for the global development and commercialization of EYLEA and aflibercept 8 mg outside the United States. Agreed-upon development expenses incurred by the Company and Bayer are generally shared equally. Bayer markets EYLEA outside the United States, and the companies share equally in profits and losses from such sales.We are obligated to reimburse Bayer for 50% of the development costs that it has incurred under the agreement from our share of the collaboration profits. The reimbursement payment in any quarter will equal 5% of the then outstanding repayment obligation, but never more than our share of the collaboration profits in the quarter unless we elect to reimburse Bayer at a faster rate.Within the United States, we retain exclusive commercialization rights and are entitled to all profits from such sales.
In 2018, we and Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Inc. entered into a collaboration to discover RNA interference ("RNAi") therapeutics for NASH and potentially other related diseases, as well as to research, co-develop and commercialize any therapeutic product candidates that emerge from these discovery efforts (including ALN-HSD, which is currently in clinical development). Under the terms of the collaboration agreement, the parties share development costs equally. During the fourth quarter of 2022, Alnylam elected to opt-out of further development activities related to ALN-HSD; as a result, we retain the exclusive right to develop and commercialize such product and Alnylam will receive a royalty on sales, if any.In 2019, we and Alnylam entered into a global, strategic collaboration to discover, develop, and commercialize RNAi therapeutics for a broad range of diseases by addressing therapeutic disease targets expressed in the eye and central nervous system ("CNS"), in addition to a select number of targets expressed in the liver. In connection with the collaboration, the Company made an up-front payment of $400.0 million to Alnylam, and also purchased shares of Alnylam common stock for $400.0 million. For each program, we provide Alnylam with a specified amount of funding at program initiation and at lead candidate designation, and Alnylam is eligible to receive two $100.0 million clinical proof-of-principle milestones for each of the eye and CNS programs (an aggregate of $200.0 million in development milestones).Under the terms of the collaboration, the parties plan to perform discovery research until designation of lead candidates. Following designation of a lead candidate, the parties may further advance such lead candidate under either a co-development/co-commercialization collaboration agreement ("Co-Co Collaboration Agreement") (under which the parties are advancing ALN-APP and ALN-PNP, which are currently in clinical development) or a license agreement ("License Agreement") structure. The initial target nomination and discovery period is five years (which may under certain situations automatically be extended for up to seven years in the aggregate) (the "Research Term"). In addition, we have an option to extend the Research Term for an additional five-year period for a research extension fee of $300.0 million.At the stage of designation of a lead candidate for CNS programs and liver programs, the parties have alternating rights to be a lead party for collaboration products. At the stage of designation of a lead candidate for eye programs, we have the sole right to take the product forward as a licensee. The lead party is required to take the program forward under the License Agreement structure unless the other party exercises its rights to opt-in to a Co-Co Collaboration Agreement as a participating party, in which case the lead party is required to take the program forward under the Co-Co Collaboration Agreement structure. Alnylam does not have rights to opt-in to a Co-Co Collaboration Agreement for eye programs.Under a License Agreement, the lead party is designated as the licensee and has the right to develop and commercialize the collaboration product under such program. The licensee will be responsible for its own costs and expenses incurred in connection with the development and commercialization of the collaboration products under the License Agreement. The licensee will pay to the licensor certain development and/or commercialization milestone payments, as well as certain tiered royalty payments to the licensor based on the aggregate annual net sales of the collaboration product.For CNS programs and liver programs, under a Co-Co Collaboration Agreement, the party designated as the lead party will lead development and commercialization of the program and the parties will split profits and share costs equally, subject to certain co-funding opt-outs at specified clinical trial phases or under other conditions. If a party exercises its co-funding opt-out right, the lead party will be required to make certain tiered royalty payments to the other party based on the aggregate annual net sales of the collaboration product and the timing of the exercise of the co-funding opt-out right.Under the terms of the collaboration, when we are the licensee under a License Agreement or the lead party under a Co-Co Collaboration Agreement, Alnylam will be responsible for the manufacture and supply of the product to us for Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials.In addition, during 2019, the parties entered into a Co-Co Collaboration Agreement for cemdisiran, a small interfering RNA ("siRNA") therapeutic targeting the C5 component of the human complement pathway being developed by Alnylam, with Alnylam as the lead party, and a License Agreement for a combination consisting of cemdisiran and pozelimab, with us as the licensee. Under the C5 siRNA Co-Co Collaboration Agreement, the parties shared costs equally, and under the License Agreement, we as the licensee are responsible for our own costs and expenses. The C5 siRNA License Agreement contains a flat low double-digit royalty payable to Alnylam on potential future net sales of the combination only subject to customary reductions, as well as up to $325.0 million in sales milestones.During the fourth quarter of 2022, we elected to opt-out of further development activities pursuant to the Co-Co Collaboration Agreement for cemdisiran as a monotherapy; as a result, Alnylam retains the right to develop and commercialize such product and we will receive a royalty on sales (if any).
In 2016, we entered into a license and collaboration agreement with Intellia Therapeutics, Inc. to advance CRISPR/Cas9 gene-editing technology for in vivo therapeutic development. NTLA-2001, which is in clinical development, is subject to a co-development and co-commercialization arrangement pursuant to which Intellia will lead development and commercialization activities and the parties share an agreed-upon percentage of development expenses and profits (if commercialized).In 2020, we expanded our existing collaboration with Intellia to provide us with rights to develop products for additional in vivo CRISPR/Cas9-based therapeutic targets and for the companies to jointly develop potential products for the treatment of hemophilia A and B, with Regeneron leading development and commercialization activities. In addition, we also received non-exclusive rights to independently develop and commercialize ex vivo gene edited products. In connection with the 2020 agreement, we made a $70.0 million up-front payment to Intellia.
Our ability to generate profits and to generate positive cash flow from operations over the next several years depends significantly on the continued success in commercializing EYLEA and Dupixent, as well as on whether we are able to obtain regulatory approval for aflibercept 8 mg and are successful in commercializing it. We expect to continue to incur substantial expenses related to our research and development activities, a portion of which we expect to be reimbursed by our collaborators. In addition, our research and development activities and related costs which are not reimbursed are expected to expand and require additional resources. We also expect to incur substantial costs related to the commercialization of our marketed products. Our financial results may fluctuate from quarter to quarter and will depend on, among other factors, the net sales of our products; the scope and progress of our research and development efforts; the timing of certain expenses; the continuation of our collaborations, in particular with Sanofi and Bayer, including our share of collaboration profits from sales of commercialized products and the amount of reimbursement of our research and development expenses that we receive from collaborators; and the amount of income tax expense we incur, which is partly dependent on the profits or losses we earn in each of the countries in which we operate. We cannot predict whether or when new products or new indications for marketed products will receive regulatory approval or, if any such approval is received, whether we will be able to successfully commercialize such product(s) and whether or when they may become profitable.
We were incorporated in the State of New York in 1988 and publicly listed in 1991. Our principal executive offices are located at 777 Old Saw Mill River Road, Tarrytown, New York 10591, and our telephone number at that address is (914) 847-7000. We make available free of charge on or through our Internet website (http://www.regeneron.com) our Annual Report on Form 10-K, Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q, Current Reports on Form 8-K, and, if applicable, amendments to those reports filed or furnished pursuant to Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Exchange Act, as soon as reasonably practicable after we electronically file such material with, or furnish it to, the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). Investors and other interested parties should note that we use our media and investor relations website (http://newsroom.regeneron.com) and our social media channels to publish important information about Regeneron, including information that may be deemed material to investors. We encourage investors and other interested parties to review the information we may publish through our media and investor relations website and the social media channels listed on our media and investor relations website, in addition to our SEC filings, press releases, conference calls, and webcasts.The information contained on our websites and social media channels is not included as a part of, or incorporated by reference into, this report.
Net product sales of EYLEA in the United States decreased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to an increase in sales-related deductions, partly offset by higher sales volume.As described in "Collaboration, License, and Other Agreements - Sanofi - Immuno-Oncology" above, effective July 1, 2022, the Company became solely responsible for the research, development, and commercialization of Libtayo worldwide and began recording net product sales of Libtayo outside the United States.
Global net product sales of Dupixent and Kevzara are recorded by Sanofi in connection with the Antibody Collaboration. As described above under "Collaboration, License, and Other Agreements - Sanofi - Antibody", on July 1, 2022, an amendment to the LCA became effective, pursuant to which the percentage of Regeneron's share of profits in any calendar quarter used to reimburse Sanofi for development costs which were funded by Sanofi increased from 10% to 20%. The increase in our share of profits in connection with commercialization of antibodies during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, was driven by profits associated with higher Dupixent sales, partly offset by the impact of the amendment to the LCA.Regeneron's share of profits in connection with the commercialization of Dupixent and Kevzara is summarized below:
During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the Company earned a $50.0 million sales-based milestone from Sanofi, upon aggregate annual sales of antibodies outside the United States (including Praluent) exceeding $2.0 billion on a rolling twelve-month basis.As the A&R IO LCA became effective July 1, 2022, the three months ended June 30, 2022 was the last period in which Sanofi collaboration revenue was recognized in connection with the IO Collaboration.
Bayer records net product sales of EYLEA outside the United States. Regeneron's share of profits in connection with commercialization of EYLEA outside the United States is summarized below:
Roche distributes and records net product sales of Ronapreve outside the United States, and the parties share gross profits from worldwide sales.
Operating expenses included a total of $238.7 million and $166.9 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, of stock-based compensation expense related to equity awards granted under our long-term incentive plans.
The following table summarizes our estimates of direct research and development expenses by clinical development program and other significant categories of research and development expenses. Direct research and development expenses are comprised primarily of costs paid to third parties for clinical and product development activities, including costs related to preclinical research activities, clinical trials, and the portion of research and development expenses incurred by our collaborators that we are obligated to reimburse. Indirect research and development expenses have not been allocated directly to each program, and primarily consist of costs to compensate personnel, overhead and infrastructure costs to maintain our facilities, and other costs related to activities that benefit multiple projects. Clinical manufacturing costs primarily consist of costs to manufacture bulk drug product for clinical development purposes as well as related drug filling, packaging, and labeling costs. Clinical manufacturing costs also includes pre-launch commercial supplies which did not meet the criteria to be capitalized as inventory. The table below also includes reimbursements of research and development expenses by collaborators, as when we are entitled to reimbursement of all or a portion of such expenses that we incur under a collaboration, we record those reimbursable amounts in the period in which such costs are incurred.
Total research and development expenses increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, partially due to the impact of the amendments to the Sanofi collaboration agreements (which were effective July 1, 2022) described under the "Collaboration, License, and Other Agreements" section above, as (i) Sanofi is no longer reimbursing us for 50% of Libtayo development costs and (ii) we recognize our 50% share of research and development expenses in connection with the Sanofi Antibody Collaboration.Research and development expenses included stock-based compensation expense of $139.5 million and $92.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.There are numerous uncertainties associated with drug development, including uncertainties related to safety and efficacy data from each phase of drug development, uncertainties related to the enrollment and performance of clinical trials, changes in regulatory requirements, changes in the competitive landscape affecting a product candidate, and other risks and uncertainties described in Part II, Item 1A. "Risk Factors." There is also variability in the duration and costs necessary to develop a pharmaceutical product, potential opportunities and/or uncertainties related to future indications to be studied, and the estimated cost and scope of the projects. The lengthy process of seeking FDA and other applicable approvals, and subsequent compliance with applicable statutes and regulations, require the expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure by us to obtain, or delay in obtaining, regulatory approvals could materially adversely affect our business. We are unable to reasonably estimate if our product candidates in clinical development will generate material product revenues and net cash inflows.
Acquired IPR&D for the three months ended March 31, 2023 included a $45.0 million up-front payment in connection with our collaboration agreement with Sonoma Biotherapeutics, Inc. Acquired IPR&D for the three months ended March 31, 2022 included a $20.0 million opt-in payment in connection with a product candidate under our collaboration agreement with Adicet Bio, Inc.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to an increase in commercialization-related expenses for Libtayo outside the United States (as effective July 1, 2022, the Company became solely responsible for the commercialization of Libtayo worldwide), higher headcount and headcount-related costs, and higher contributions to an independent not-for-profit patient assistance organization. These increases were partly offset by a decrease in commercialization-related expenses for EYLEA. Selling, general, and administrative expenses also included stock-based compensation expense of $76.8 million and $60.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.
Cost of collaboration and contract manufacturing increased for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to the recognition of costs in connection with manufacturing commercial supplies for Sanofi related to Praluent outside the United States and Dupixent globally.
Other operating (income) expense, net, for the three months ended March 31, 2022 included recognition of amounts previously deferred in connection with up-front and development milestone payments, as applicable, received in connection with our Sanofi IO, Teva, and MTPC collaborative arrangements. As the A&R IO LCA became effective July 1, 2022, the three months ended June 30, 2022 was the last period in which such amounts were recognized in connection with our Sanofi IO Collaboration. In addition, during the three months ended September 30, 2022, the Company discontinued further clinical development of fasinumab, and, as a result, we deemed our obligation to provide development services in connection with the Teva and MTPC collaborative arrangements to be complete.
Other income (expense) consists of the following:
The Company's effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was positively impacted, compared to the U.S. federal statutory rate, primarily by stock-based compensation and income earned in foreign jurisdictions with tax rates lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate. The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was positively impacted, compared to the same period in 2022, primarily by stock-based compensation.
Our financial condition is summarized as follows:
As of March 31, 2023, we also had borrowing availability of $750.0 million under a revolving credit facility.
Capital expenditures during the three months ended March 31, 2023 included costs incurred in connection with the expansion of our Tarrytown, New York campus, as well costs associated with the expansion of our manufacturing facilities in Rensselaer, New York (including the ongoing construction of a fill/finish facility and related equipment). We expect to incur capital expenditures of $800 million to $900 million for the full year of 2023 primarily in connection with the continued expansion of our research, preclinical manufacturing, and support facilities at our Tarrytown campus and our Rensselaer manufacturing facility (including the fill/finish facility).Payments for Libtayo intangible asset of $100.9 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 were related to contingent consideration in connection with our acquisition of the exclusive right to develop, commercialize, and manufacture Libtayo worldwide (as described in "Collaboration, License, and Other Agreements - Sanofi - Immuno-Oncology" above).
Proceeds from issuances of Common Stock, in connection with exercises of employee stock options, were $485.2 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $521.6 million during the three months ended March 31, 2022. For information related to repurchases of Common Stock, see "Share Repurchase Programs" section below.
In November 2021, our board of directors authorized a share repurchase program to repurchase up to $3.0 billion of our Common Stock. The share repurchase program permits the Company to make repurchases through a variety of methods, including open-market transactions (including pursuant to a trading plan adopted in accordance with Rule 10b5-1 of the Exchange Act), privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchases, block trades, and other transactions in compliance with Rule 10b-18 of the Exchange Act. Share repurchases may be made from time to time at management's discretion, and the timing and amount of any such repurchases will be determined based on share price, market conditions, legal requirements, and other relevant factors. The program has no time limit and can be discontinued at any time. There can be no assurance as to the timing or number of shares of any repurchases in the future.In January 2023, our board of directors authorized an additional share repurchase program to repurchase up to an additional $3.0 billion of our Common Stock. The share repurchase program was approved under terms substantially similar to the share repurchase program above.As of March 31, 2023, an aggregate of $3.051 billion remained available for share repurchases under the programs.The table below summarizes the shares of our Common Stock we repurchased and the cost of the shares, which were recorded as Treasury Stock.
A summary of critical accounting estimates is presented in Part II, Item 7. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022 (filed February 6, 2023). There have been no material changes to critical accounting estimates during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
As of March 31, 2023, the future adoption of recently issued accounting standards is not expected to have a material impact on the Company's financial position or results of operations.