
Certain statements made in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q may constitute “forward-looking statements” under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include information concerning future strategic objectives, business prospects, anticipated savings, financial results (including expenses, earnings, liquidity, cash flow and capital expenditures), industry or market conditions, demand for and pricing of our products, acquisitions, divestitures, anticipated results of litigation, regulatory developments, and general economic conditions. In addition, words such as “believes,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “plans,” “estimates,” “projects,” and future or conditional verbs such as “will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” and “would,” as well as any other statement that necessarily depends on future events, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees, and they involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Although we make such statements based on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, there can be no assurance that actual results will not differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements. We caution investors not to rely unduly on any forward-looking statements and urge you to carefully consider the risks described in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) from time to time, including our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K, and subsequent Quarterly Reports on Form 10-Q and Current Reports on Form 8-K, which are available at www.raymondjames.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. We expressly disclaim any obligation to update any forward-looking statement in the event it later turns out to be inaccurate, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help the reader understand the results of our operations and financial condition.  This MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our condensed consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes to condensed consolidated financial statements.  Where “NM” is used in various percentage change computations, the computed percentage change has been determined to be not meaningful.We operate as a financial holding company and bank holding company.  Results in the businesses in which we operate are highly correlated to general economic conditions and, more specifically, to the direction of the U.S. equity and fixed income markets, changes in interest rates, market volatility, corporate and mortgage lending markets and commercial and residential credit trends.  Overall market conditions, economic, political and regulatory trends, and industry competition are among the factors which could affect us and which are unpredictable and beyond our control.  These factors affect the financial decisions made by market participants, including investors, depositors, borrowers, and competitors, impacting their level of participation in the financial markets.  These factors also impact the level of investment banking activity and asset valuations, which ultimately affect our business results.
For our fiscal second quarter of 2023, we generated net revenues of $2.87 billion, an increase of 7% compared with the prior-year quarter, while pre-tax income of $557 million increased 29%.  Our net income available to common shareholders of $425 million increased 32%, and our earnings per diluted share were $1.93, reflecting a 27% increase.  Our annualized return on common equity (“ROCE”) for the quarter was 17.3%, compared with 15.0% for the prior-year quarter, and our annualized return on tangible common equity (“ROTCE”) was 21.3%(1), compared with 16.8%(1) for the prior-year quarter.  Excluding $28 million of expenses related to acquisitions completed in prior years, such as compensation related to retention awards and amortization of identifiable intangible assets, our adjusted net income available to common shareholders was $446 million(1) for the three months ended March 31, 2023, 29% higher than adjusted net income available to common shareholders for the prior-year quarter, and our adjusted earnings per diluted share were $2.03(1), 25% higher than adjusted earnings per diluted share for the prior-year quarter.  Adjusted annualized ROCE for the quarter was 18.2%(1) and adjusted annualized ROTCE was 22.3%(1), compared with adjusted annualized ROCE of 16.1%(1) and adjusted annualized ROTCE of 18.0%(1) for the prior-year quarter.(1)    ROTCE, adjusted net income available to common shareholders, adjusted earnings per diluted share, adjusted annualized ROCE, and adjusted annualized ROTCE are non-GAAP financial measures.  Please see the “Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures” in this MD&A for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures, and for other important disclosures.Quarterly net revenues increased compared with the prior-year quarter due to the benefit of higher short-term interest rates on net interest income and RJBDP fees from third-party banks, as well as incremental revenues from our prior-year acquisitions of TriState Capital in June 2022, SumRidge Partners, LLC (“SumRidge Partners”) in July 2022 and, to a lesser extent Charles Stanley Group PLC (“Charles Stanley”) in late January 2022.  These increases were offset by lower asset management and related administrative fees, primarily as a result of lower PCG client assets in fee-based accounts at the beginning of the current quarter compared with the prior-year quarter, as well as lower investment banking revenues due to a challenging market environment during the current quarter.  Brokerage revenues also declined compared with the prior-year quarter primarily due to lower asset-based trailing revenues in the PCG segment, as well as decreased activity from depository clients in the Capital Markets segment.Compensation, commissions and benefits expense decreased 2%, primarily attributable to the decrease in compensable revenues compared with the prior-year quarter, partially offset by incremental compensation expenses arising from the aforementioned acquisitions, an increase in compensation costs to support our growth, and annual salary increases.  Our compensation ratio, or the ratio of compensation, commissions and benefits expense to net revenues, was 63.3%, compared with 69.3% for the prior-year quarter.  Excluding acquisition-related compensation expenses, our adjusted compensation ratio was 62.8%(1), compared with 68.8%(1) for the prior-year quarter.  The decline in the compensation ratio primarily resulted from changes in our revenue mix due to higher net interest income and RJBDP fees from third-party banks, which have little associated direct compensation.Non-compensation expenses increased 28%, due to incremental expenses arising from the aforementioned acquisitions, higher legal and regulatory costs, including the impact of an unfavorable arbitration award during the current quarter, as well as higher communications and information processing expenses reflecting continued technology investments and higher business development expenses compared to the relatively low prior-year level.  The bank loan provision for credit losses was $28 million for the current-year quarter compared with a provision of $21 million for the prior-year quarter.  Our effective income tax rate was 23.3% for our fiscal second quarter of 2023, a decrease compared with the 25.4% effective income tax rate for the prior-year quarter, primarily due to the favorable impact of nontaxable valuation gains associated with our company-owned life insurance policies in the current quarter compared with nondeductible valuation losses in the prior-year quarter.As of March 31, 2023, our Tier 1 leverage ratio of 11.5% and Total capital ratio of 21.4% were both more than double the regulatory requirement to be considered well-capitalized.  We also continue to have substantial liquidity with $1.8 billion(2) of cash at the parent as of March 31, 2023, which includes cash the parent loaned to RJ&A to invest on its behalf.  Despite a challenging operating environment, we renewed our revolving credit facility in April 2023, expanding our borrowing capacity under the facility from $500 million to $750 million.  In addition, we increased our FHLB borrowings in the Bank segment by $500 million as of March 31, 2023 compared to December 31, 2022, and subsequently repaid $200 million of these borrowings in April 2023, leaving us with more than $9 billion of FHLB borrowing capacity in the Bank segment.  In addition, although recent turmoil in the banking industry has heightened awareness around bank deposits in excess of FDIC insurance limits, as of March 31, 2023, 88% of our Bank segment deposits were FDIC-insured, including nearly 95% at Raymond James Bank.  We believe our funding and capital position provides us the opportunity to manage our balance sheet prudently in the current operating environment and to continue being opportunistic and invest in growth.  During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we repurchased 3.75 million shares of our common stock for $350 million at an average price of $93 per share under the Board of Directors’ common stock repurchase authorization.  After the effect of those repurchases, $1.1 billion remained under such authorization.  We currently expect to continue to repurchase our common stock in fiscal 2023 to offset the shares issued with the acquisition of TriState Capital in fiscal 2022, as well as to offset dilution from share-based compensation; however, we will continue to monitor market conditions and other capital needs as we consider these repurchases.(1)    Adjusted compensation ratio is a non-GAAP financial measure.  Please see the “Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures” in this MD&A for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures, and for other important disclosures.(2)    For additional information, please see the “Liquidity and capital resources - Sources of liquidity” section in this MD&A.We remain well-positioned entering our fiscal third quarter of 2023.  We expect our fiscal third quarter results to be favorably impacted by higher asset management and related administrative fees, which will benefit from the 5% sequential increase in both PCG fee-based assets and financial assets under management as of March 31, 2023.  In addition, our recruiting pipelines remain solid across our affiliation options and we continue to see solid retention of existing advisors.  However, we expect our combined net interest income and RJBDP fees from third-party banks to decline in our fiscal third quarter due to a decrease in average balances swept to third-party banks and a contraction in the Bank segment’s net interest margin given the higher level of cash balances we plan to maintain in our Bank segment due to market conditions, as well as the impact from higher-cost diversified funding sources, including our Enhanced Savings Program, which was launched to PCG clients in March 2023.  We expect to continue to face macroeconomic uncertainties which may continue to have a negative impact on equity and fixed income markets.  As a result, we may continue to experience headwinds for brokerage revenues and investment banking revenues, despite our healthy investment banking pipelines.  In addition, although we have proactively taken steps to manage our credit risk in our loan portfolio, future economic deterioration or changes in our macroeconomic outlook could result in increased bank loan provisions for credit losses in future periods.For the six months ended March 31, 2023, we generated net revenues of $5.66 billion, an increase of 4% compared with the prior-year period, and pre-tax income of $1.21 billion, an increase of 22%.  Our net income available to common shareholders of $932 million was 21% higher than the prior-year period and our earnings per diluted share were $4.23, reflecting a 17% increase.  Our annualized ROCE was 19.3%, compared with 18.1% for the prior-year period, and our annualized ROTCE was 23.8%(1), compared with 20.2%(1) for the prior-year period.  The six months ended March 31, 2023 included $57 million of expenses related to acquisitions completed in prior years, such as compensation related to retention awards and amortization of identifiable intangible assets, as well as the favorable impact of a $32 million insurance settlement received during our fiscal first quarter related to a previously-settled litigation matter.  Excluding these items, our adjusted net income available to common shareholders was $951 million(1), an increase of 18% compared with the prior-year period, and our adjusted earnings per diluted share were $4.31(1), an increase of 13%.  Adjusted annualized ROCE was 19.7%(1), compared with 19.0%(1) in the prior-year period, and adjusted annualized ROTCE was 24.2%(1), compared with 21.2%(1) in the prior-year period.The increase in net revenues compared with the prior-year period was primarily driven by the benefit of significantly higher short-term interest rates in the current-year period on both net interest income and RJBDP fees from third-party banks, as well as incremental revenues arising from our prior-year acquisitions of Charles Stanley, TriState Capital and SumRidge.  These increases were offset by lower asset management and related administrative fees, primarily attributable to lower PCG client assets in fee-based accounts, and declines in investment banking and brokerage revenues primarily due to a more challenging market environment during the current-year period. Compensation, commissions and benefits expense decreased 5%, primarily attributable to the decrease in compensable revenues compared with the prior-year period, partially offset by incremental expenses arising from our prior-year acquisitions of Charles Stanley, TriState Capital, and SumRidge, as well as an increase in compensation costs to support our growth and annual salary increases.  Our compensation ratio was 62.8%, compared with 68.5% for the prior-year period.  Excluding acquisition-related compensation expenses, our adjusted compensation ratio was 62.2%(1), compared with an adjusted compensation ratio of 68.0%(1) for the prior-year period.Non-compensation expenses increased 23%, primarily due to incremental expenses arising from our acquisitions of Charles Stanley, TriState Capital, and SumRidge, as well as increases in business development expenses, the bank loan provision for credit losses, and communications and information processing expenses.  The current-year period also included the aforementioned increase in legal and regulatory costs.  Partially offsetting these increases was the aforementioned favorable insurance settlement received. Our effective income tax rate was 22.6% for the six months ended March 31, 2023, a slight increase from 22.4% for the prior-year period. (1)    ROTCE, adjusted net income available to common shareholders, adjusted earnings per diluted share, adjusted annualized ROCE, adjusted annualized ROTCE, and adjusted compensation ratio are non-GAAP financial measures.  Please see the “Reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP financial measures” in this MD&A for a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures, and for other important disclosures.In December 2022, the Board of Directors increased the quarterly cash dividend on common shares to $0.42 per share and authorized common stock repurchases of up to $1.5 billion.  During the six months ended March 31, 2023, we repurchased 5.04 million shares of our common stock for $488 million at an average price of $97 per share under the Board of Directors’ common stock repurchase authorization.
We utilize certain non-GAAP financial measures as additional measures to aid in, and enhance, the understanding of our financial results and related measures.  These non-GAAP financial measures have been separately identified in this document.  We believe certain of these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information to management and investors by excluding certain material items that may not be indicative of our core operating results.  We utilize these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing the financial performance of the business, as they facilitate a comparison of current- and prior-period results.  Beginning with our fiscal third quarter of 2022, certain of our non-GAAP financial measures have been adjusted for additional expenses directly related to our acquisitions that we believe are not indicative of our core operating results, such as those related to amortization of identifiable intangible assets arising from acquisitions and acquisition-related retention.  Prior periods have been conformed to the current period presentation.  We believe that return on tangible common equity is meaningful to investors as it facilitates comparisons of our results to the results of other companies. In the following tables, the tax effect of non-GAAP adjustments reflects the statutory rate associated with each non-GAAP item.  These non-GAAP financial measures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP.  In addition, our non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures of other companies.  The following tables provide a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
Total compensation ratio is computed by dividing compensation, commissions and benefits expense by net revenues for each respective period.  Adjusted total compensation ratio is computed by dividing adjusted compensation, commissions and benefits expense by net revenues for each respective period.Tangible common equity is computed by subtracting goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, net, along with the associated deferred tax liabilities, from total common equity attributable to RJF.  Average common equity is computed by adding the total common equity attributable to RJF as of the date indicated to the prior quarter-end total, and dividing by two, or in the case of average tangible common equity, computed by adding tangible common equity as of the date indicated to the prior quarter-end total, and dividing by two.  Average common equity for the year-to-date period is computed by adding the total common equity attributable to RJF as of each quarter-end date during the indicated year-to-date period to the beginning of year total, and dividing by three, or in the case of average tangible common equity, computed by adding tangible common equity as of each quarter-end date during the indicated year-to-date period to the beginning of year total, and dividing by three.  Adjusted average common equity is computed by adjusting for the impact on average common equity of the non-GAAP adjustments, as applicable for each respective period.  Adjusted average tangible common equity is computed by adjusting for the impact on average tangible common equity of the non-GAAP adjustments, as applicable for each respective period.ROCE is computed by dividing annualized net income available to common shareholders for the period indicated by average common equity for each respective period or, in the case of ROTCE, computed by dividing annualized net income available to common shareholders by average tangible common equity for each respective period.  Adjusted ROCE is computed by dividing annualized adjusted net income available to common shareholders by adjusted average common equity for each respective period, or in the case of adjusted ROTCE, computed by dividing annualized adjusted net income available to common shareholders by adjusted average tangible common equity for each respective period.
Largely in response to inflationary pressures, the Fed rapidly increased its benchmark short-term interest rates commencing in March 2022 and continuing into our fiscal second quarter of 2023.  Over this period, the Fed increased the Fed funds target rate from a March 31, 2022 range of 0.25% to 0.50% to a March 31, 2023 range of 4.75% to 5%.  The Fed further increased the Fed funds target rate by 25 basis points in May 2023 and indicated that it intends to closely monitor short-term interest rates throughout the remainder of our fiscal 2023.  The following table details the Fed’s recent short-term interest rate activity.
Increases in short-term interest rates have positively impacted our net interest income and the fee income we earn from third-party banks on client cash balances swept to such banks as part of the RJBDP (included in account and service fees), which is also sensitive to changes in interest rates.Given the relationship between our interest-sensitive assets and liabilities (primarily held in our PCG, Bank, and Other segments) and the nature of fees we earn from third-party banks on client cash balances swept to such banks as part of the RJBDP (included in account and service fees), which are also sensitive to changes in interest rates, increases in short-term interest rates generally result in an increase in our net earnings, although the magnitude of the impact to our net interest margin depends on the yields on interest-earning assets relative to the cost of interest-bearing liabilities, including deposit rates paid to clients on their cash balances.  Changes to the regulatory landscape governing the fees the firm earns on client assets, including cash sweep balances, could negatively impact our earnings.  As a result of our diverse funding sources, strong loan growth and high concentration of floating-rate assets, we benefited from the increases in short-term interest rates during the three and six months ended March 31, 2023.  However, despite the recent increases in short-term interest rates, we expect our combined net interest income and RJBDP fees from third-party banks to decline in our fiscal third quarter due to a decrease in average balances swept to third-party banks as well as a lower net interest margin in our Bank Segment, given the higher level of cash balances we plan to maintain in our Bank segment due to market conditions, as well as the impact from higher-cost diversified funding sources, including our Enhanced Savings Program, which was launched to PCG clients in March 2023.  Our domestic client cash sweep balances represent a relatively low-cost funding source.  As we pursue further diversified funding sources other than our domestic client cash sweep balances, such as the Enhanced Savings Program, our costs may increase as those funding sources typically reflect higher costs than our domestic client cash sweep balances.  In addition, our pace of loan growth may continue to fluctuate over time in response to changes in interest rates and other market factors. Refer to the discussion of our net interest income within the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations” of our PCG, Bank, and Other segments, where applicable.  Also refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Private Client Group - Clients’ domestic cash sweep balances” for further information on the RJBDP.The following table presents our consolidated average interest-earning asset and interest-bearing liability balances, interest income and expense and the related rates.
(1)  Loans are presented net of unamortized purchase discounts or premiums, unearned income, and deferred origination fees and costs.(2) Nonaccrual loans are included in the average loan balances.  Any payments received for corporate nonaccrual loans are applied entirely to principal.  Interest income on residential mortgage nonaccrual loans is recognized on a cash basis.(3) The yield on tax-exempt loans in the preceding table is presented on a taxable-equivalent basis utilizing the applicable federal statutory rates for each of the years presented. (4) The average balance, interest expense, and average rate for “Total bank deposits” included amounts associated with affiliate deposits.  Such amounts are eliminated in consolidation and are offset in “All other interest-bearing liabilities” under “All other segments”.Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in average interest rates.  The following table shows the effect that these factors had on the interest earned on our interest-earning assets and the interest incurred on our interest-bearing liabilities.  The effect of changes in volume is determined by multiplying the change in volume by the previous period’s average rate.  Similarly, the effect of rate changes is calculated by multiplying the change in average rate by the previous period’s volume.  Changes attributable to both volume and rate have been allocated proportionately.
(1)  Loans are presented net of unamortized discounts, unearned income, and deferred loan fees and costs.(2) Nonaccrual loans are included in the average loan balances.  Any payments received for corporate nonaccrual loans are applied entirely to principal.  Interest income on residential mortgage nonaccrual loans is recognized on a cash basis.(3) The yield on tax-exempt loans in the preceding table is presented on a taxable-equivalent basis utilizing the applicable federal statutory rates for each of the years presented. (4) The average balance, interest expense, and average rate for “Total bank deposits” included amounts associated with affiliate deposits.  Such amounts are eliminated in consolidation and are offset in “All other interest-bearing liabilities” under “All other segments”.Increases and decreases in interest income and interest expense result from changes in average balances (volume) of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities, as well as changes in average interest rates.  The following table shows the effect that these factors had on the interest earned on our interest-earning assets and the interest incurred on our interest-bearing liabilities.  The effect of changes in volume is determined by multiplying the change in volume by the previous period’s average yield/cost.  Similarly, the effect of rate changes is calculated by multiplying the change in average yield/cost by the previous period’s volume.  Changes attributable to both volume and rate have been allocated proportionately.
For an overview of our PCG segment operations, as well as a description of the key factors impacting our PCG results of operations, refer to the information presented in “Item 1 - Business” and “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2022 Form 10-K.
(1)Includes assets associated with firms affiliated with us through our Registered Investment Advisor & Custody Services (“RCS”) division of $123.5 billion as of March 31, 2023, $115.6 billion as of December 31, 2022, $108.5 billion as of September 30, 2022, $99.2 billion as of March 31, 2022, $101.6 billion as of December 31, 2021, and $92.7 billion as of September 30, 2021.  Of these amounts, $103.6 billion as of March 31, 2023, $96.6 billion as of December 31, 2022, $89.9 billion as of September 30, 2022, $84.0 billion as of March 31, 2022, $85.5 billion as of December 31, 2021, and $77.2 billion as of September 30, 2021 were fee-based assets.  Based on the nature of the services provided to such firms, revenues related to these assets are included in “Account and service fees.”(2)A portion of our “Assets in fee-based accounts” is invested in “managed programs” overseen by our Asset Management segment, specifically our Asset Management Services division of RJ&A (“AMS”).  These assets are included in our financial assets under management as disclosed in the “Selected key metrics” section of our “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Asset Management.”
(1)   Domestic Private Client Group net new assets represents domestic Private Client Group client inflows, including dividends and interest, less domestic Private Client Group client outflows, including commissions, advisory fees and other fees.  (2)    The Domestic Private Client Group net new asset growth - annualized percentage is based on the beginning Domestic Private Client Group AUA balance for the indicated period. PCG AUA and PCG assets in fee-based accounts as of March 31, 2023 each increased 5% compared with December 31, 2022, and increased 13% and 14%, respectively, compared with September 30, 2022 due to equity market appreciation and strong net inflows of client assets during the period.  We expect that the 5% increase in fee-based accounts compared with December 31, 2022 will positively impact our asset management and related administrative fees for our fiscal third quarter of 2023.  Compared with March 31, 2022, PCG AUA declined 2%, primarily due to a net decline in equity markets since March 31, 2022, offset by the favorable impacts of our recruiting.  PCG assets in fee-based accounts continued to be a significant percentage of overall PCG AUA due to many clients’ preference for fee-based alternatives versus transaction-based accounts and, as a result, a significant portion of our PCG revenues is more directly impacted by market movements.Fee-based accounts within our PCG segment are comprised of a wide array of products and programs that we offer our clients.  The majority of assets in fee-based accounts within our PCG segment are invested in programs for which our financial advisors provide investment advisory services, either on a discretionary or non-discretionary basis.  Administrative services for such accounts (e.g., record-keeping) are generally performed by our Asset Management segment and, as a result, a portion of the related revenue is shared with the Asset Management segment.We also offer our clients fee-based accounts that are invested in “managed programs” overseen by AMS, which is part of our Asset Management segment.  Fee-billable assets invested in managed programs are included in both “Assets in fee-based accounts” in the preceding table and “Financial assets under management” in the Asset Management segment.  Revenues related to managed programs are shared by our PCG and Asset Management segments.  The Asset Management segment receives a higher portion of the revenues related to accounts invested in managed programs, as compared to the portion received for programs for which our financial advisors provide investment advisory services, as it is performing portfolio management services in addition to administrative services.The vast majority of the revenues we earn from fee-based accounts are recorded in “Asset management and related administrative fees” on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.  Fees received from such accounts are based on the value of client assets in fee-based accounts and vary based on the specific account types in which the client invests and the level of assets in the client relationship.  As fees for the majority of such accounts are billed based on balances as of the beginning of the quarter, revenues from fee-based accounts may not be immediately affected by changes in asset values, but rather the impacts are seen in the following quarter.
(1)  Includes the impact of the transfer of one firm with 166 financial advisors previously affiliated as independent contractors to our RCS division during our fiscal third quarter of 2022.The number of financial advisors as of March 31, 2023 increased compared with December 31, 2022 and September 30, 2022, as the impacts of new recruits and trainees that were moved into production roles were partially offset by financial advisors who left the firm, including planned retirements where assets are generally retained at the firm pursuant to advisor succession plans.  The recruiting pipeline remains solid across our affiliation options; however, the timing of financial advisors joining the firm may be impacted by market uncertainty.  We expect to continue to experience transfers to our RCS division in fiscal 2023; however, consistent with our experience in fiscal 2022, we do not expect these financial advisor transfers to significantly impact our results of operations.  Advisors in our RCS division are not included in our financial advisor metric although their client assets are included in PCG AUA.
(1)  In March 2023, we launched our Enhanced Savings Program, in which Private Client Group clients may deposit cash in a high-yield Raymond James Bank account.  These balances are reflected in Bank deposits on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition. Three months ended March 31,Six months ended March 31,2023202220232022Average yield on RJBDP - third-party banks3.25 %0.32 %2.93 %0.30 %A significant portion of our domestic clients’ cash is included in the RJBDP, a multi-bank sweep program in which clients’ cash deposits in their brokerage accounts are swept into interest-bearing deposit accounts at either Raymond James Bank or TriState Capital Bank, which are included in our Bank segment, or various third-party banks.  Our PCG segment earns servicing fees for the administrative services we provide related to our clients’ deposits that are swept to such banks as part of the RJBDP.  These servicing fees are variable in nature and fluctuate based on client cash balances in the program, as well as the level of short-term interest rates and the interest paid to clients on balances in the RJBDP.  Under our intersegment policies, the PCG segment receives the greater of a base servicing fee or a net yield equivalent to the average yield that the firm would otherwise receive from third-party banks in the RJBDP.  In the current market environment the PCG segment revenues will reflect RJBDP fee revenues derived from the yield from third-party banks in the program and the Bank segment RJBDP servicing costs reflect such market rate for the deposits.  The fees that the PCG segment earns from the Bank segment, as well as the servicing costs incurred on the deposits in the Bank segment, are eliminated in consolidation.  The “Average yield on RJBDP - third-party banks” in the preceding table is computed by dividing annualized RJBDP fees from third-party banks, which are net of the interest expense paid to clients by the third-party banks, by the average daily RJBDP balance at third-party banks.  The average yield on RJBDP - third-party banks increased from the prior-year quarter as a result of the significant increases in the Fed’s short-term benchmark interest rate, which began in March 2022.  We expect a decline in our RJBDP fees in our fiscal third quarter of 2023 due to lower average balances in the program.Total client domestic cash sweep and Enhanced Savings Program balances declined 14% compared with December 31, 2022 and 22% compared with September 30, 2022, as a result of continued cash sorting activity given the higher short-term interest rate environment, partially offset by the launch of the Enhanced Savings Program in March 2023, which resulted in $2.75 billion of client cash balances as of March 31, 2023.  PCG segment results can be impacted by not only changes in the level of client cash balances, but also by the allocation of client cash balances between RJBDP, CIP, and the Enhanced Savings Program, as the PCG segment may earn different amounts from each of these client cash destinations, depending on multiple factors.Net revenues of $2.14 billion increased 12% and pre-tax income of $441 million increased 107%.Asset management and related administrative fees decreased $143 million, or 11%, primarily due to lower assets in fee-based accounts at the beginning of the current quarter compared with the prior-year quarter due to declines in the equity market.Brokerage revenues decreased $33 million, or 8%, primarily due to lower trailing revenues from mutual fund and annuity products primarily resulting from market-driven declines in asset values for products for which we receive trails.Account and service fees increased $341 million, or 148%, primarily due to higher RJBDP fees from both our Bank segment and third-party banks resulting from significantly higher short-term interest rates compared with the prior-year quarter.Net interest income increased $54 million, or 159%, due to the increase in short-term interest rates applicable to our cash, segregated cash, and client margin account balances.Compensation-related expenses decreased $57 million, or 4%, primarily due to lower commission expense resulting from lower compensable revenues, including asset management and related administrative fees and brokerage revenues, partially offset by an increase in compensation costs to support our growth, annual salary increases, and, to a lesser extent, incremental expenses arising from our January 2022 acquisition of Charles Stanley.Non-compensation expenses increased $51 million, or 27%, driven by higher legal and regulatory costs, including the impact of an unfavorable arbitration award during the current quarter, as well as higher communications and information processing expenses primarily due to ongoing enhancements of our technology platforms, an increase in travel and event-related expenses compared with the relatively low levels in the prior-year quarter, and incremental expenses resulting from our acquisition of Charles Stanley.Net revenues of $4.21 billion increased 12% and pre-tax income of $875 million increased 114%.Asset management and related administrative fees decreased $252 million, or 10%, primarily due to lower assets in fee-based accounts at the beginning of each of the current-year quarterly billing periods compared with the prior-year quarterly billing periods, partially offset by incremental revenues arising from the acquisition of Charles Stanley.Brokerage revenues decreased $85 million, or 11%, primarily due to lower trailing revenues from mutual fund and annuity products primarily resulting from market-driven declines in asset values for products for which we receive trails.Account and service fees increased $674 million, or 146%, primarily due to an increase in RJBDP fees from both our Bank segment and third-party banks resulting from significantly higher short-term interest rates compared with the prior-year period, partially offset by lower client cash balances in the RJBDP.  Mutual fund service fees decreased primarily due to market-driven declines in mutual fund assets.  Net interest income increased $111 million, or 173%, primarily due to the significant increase in short-term interest rates applicable to our cash, segregated cash, and client margin account balances.Compensation-related expenses decreased $110 million, or 4%, primarily due to lower commission expense resulting from lower compensable revenues, including asset management and related administrative fees and brokerage revenues, partially offset by an increase in compensation costs to support our growth, annual salary increases, and incremental expenses resulting from our acquisition of Charles Stanley.Non-compensation expenses increased $89 million, or 25%, due to incremental expenses resulting from our acquisition of Charles Stanley, higher communications and information processing expenses primarily due to ongoing enhancements of our technology platforms, increases in travel and event-related expenses compared with the low levels incurred in the prior-year period, and the aforementioned increases in legal and regulatory costs.
For an overview of our Capital Markets segment operations, as well as a description of the key factors impacting our Capital Markets results of operations, refer to the information presented in “Item 1 - Business” and “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2022 Form 10-K.
Net revenues of $302 million decreased 27% and the pre-tax loss was $34 million compared with pre-tax income of $87 million for the prior-year quarter.Investment banking revenues decreased $81 million, or 36%, as activity levels in the current quarter were negatively impacted by heightened market volatility and macroeconomic uncertainties which continue to dampen capital markets activity across the industry.  Our investment banking pipeline remains healthy and, in part, reflects the investments we have made over the past several years; however, continued market uncertainty could delay, or ultimately prevent, the closing of transactions, which could negatively impact our results.Brokerage revenues decreased $36 million, or 22%, primarily due to a decrease in fixed income brokerage revenues resulting from decreased activity from depository institution clients due to challenging market conditions, partially offset by incremental revenues from SumRidge Partners, which was acquired on July 1, 2022.  We expect our fixed income brokerage revenues to continue to be negatively impacted by the challenging market conditions which have resulted in a decline in cash balances at many of our depository institution clients, decreasing their immediate demand for our products and services.Compensation-related expenses decreased $22 million, or 9%, due to lower revenues, partially offset by incremental compensation expenses arising from our acquisition of SumRidge Partners, higher salaries, in part due to inflationary and market compensation pressures, and higher share-based compensation amortization resulting from production-related awards granted in prior periods which are amortized over the vesting period.  Non-compensation expenses increased $32 million, or 44%, primarily attributable to incremental expenses associated with SumRidge Partners, an increase in travel and event-related expenses from the relatively low prior-year levels, and higher professional fees.Net revenues of $597 million decreased 42% and the pre-tax loss was $50 million compared with pre-tax income of $288 million for the prior-year period.Investment banking revenues decreased $360 million, or 56%, compared with a strong prior-year period, as activity levels were negatively impacted in the current-year period by very different market conditions compared with the prior-year period, resulting from the aforementioned macroeconomic uncertainties impacting the industry.Brokerage revenues decreased $61 million, or 19%, primarily due to a decrease in fixed income brokerage revenues as a result of the aforementioned challenging market conditions, partially offset by incremental revenues from SumRidge Partners.Compensation-related expenses decreased $140 million, or 24%, primarily due to the decrease in revenues, partially offset by incremental expenses associated with SumRidge Partners, higher salaries, in part due to inflationary and market compensation pressures, and higher share-based compensation amortization resulting from production-related awards granted in prior periods which are amortized over the vesting period.  Non-compensation expenses increased $48 million, or 31%, primarily due to incremental expenses associated with SumRidge Partners, increased travel and event-related expenses and higher professional fees compared with the prior-year period.
For an overview of our Asset Management segment operations as well as a description of the key factors impacting our Asset Management results of operations, refer to the information presented in “Item 1 - Business” and “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2022 Form 10-K.
Management fees recorded in our Asset Management segment are generally calculated as a percentage of the value of our fee-billable financial assets under management (“AUM”).  These AUM include the portion of fee-based AUA in our PCG segment that is invested in programs overseen by our Asset Management segment (included in the “AMS” line of the following table), as well as retail accounts managed on behalf of third-party institutions, institutional accounts and mutual funds that we manage (collectively included in the “Raymond James Investment Management” line of the following table).Revenues related to fee-based AUA in our PCG segment are shared by the PCG and Asset Management segments, the amount of which depends on whether or not clients are invested in assets that are in managed programs overseen by our Asset Management segment and the administrative services provided (see our “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Private Client Group” for more information).  Our AUM in AMS are impacted by market fluctuations and net inflows or outflows of assets, including transfers between fee-based accounts and transaction-based accounts within our PCG segment.Revenues earned by Raymond James Investment Management for retail accounts managed on behalf of third-party institutions, institutional accounts and our mutual funds are recorded entirely in the Asset Management segment.  Our AUM in Raymond James Investment Management are impacted by market and investment performance and net inflows or outflows of assets.Fees for our managed programs are generally collected quarterly.  Approximately 65% of these fees are based on balances as of the beginning of the quarter (primarily in AMS), approximately 15% are based on balances as of the end of the quarter, and approximately 20% are based on average daily balances throughout the quarter.
(1)Represents the portion of our PCG segment fee-based AUA (as disclosed in “Assets in fee-based accounts” in the “Selected key metrics - PCG client asset balances” section of our “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Private Client Group”) that is invested in managed programs overseen by the Asset Management segment.
See “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Private Client Group” for further information about our retail client assets, including those fee-based assets invested in programs managed by AMS.
Assets managed by Raymond James Investment Management include assets managed by our subsidiaries: Eagle Asset Management, Scout Investments, Reams Asset Management (a division of Scout Investments), ClariVest Asset Management, Cougar Global Investments, and Chartwell Investment Partners (“Chartwell”), which was acquired on June 1, 2022 in connection with our acquisition of TriState Capital.  The following table presents Raymond James Investment Management’s AUM by objective, excluding assets for which it does not exercise discretion, as well as the approximate average client fee rate earned on such assets.
The following table includes assets held in certain non-discretionary asset-based programs for which the Asset Management segment does not exercise discretion but provides administrative support (including for affiliated entities).  The vast majority of these assets are also included in our PCG segment fee-based AUA (as disclosed in “Assets in fee-based accounts” in the “Selected key metrics - PCG client asset balances” section of our “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Private Client Group”).  Administrative fees associated with these programs are predominantly based on balances at the beginning of the quarter.
The increase in assets as of March 31, 2023 compared with December 31, 2022 and September 30, 2022 was largely due to equity market appreciation and continued growth in the PCG segment.  The slight decrease in assets compared to March 31, 2022 was due to declines in the equity market since such time, offset by continued growth in the PCG segment and the favorable impact of our June 1, 2022 acquisition of Chartwell.
The following table includes assets held in asset-based programs in Raymond James Trust, N.A. (including those managed for affiliated entities).
Net revenues of $216 million decreased 8% and pre-tax income of $82 million decreased 20%.Asset management and related administrative fees decreased $20 million, or 9%, driven by a lower beginning balance of assets in non-discretionary asset-based programs and financial assets under management at AMS, as well as lower average financial assets under management at Raymond James Investment Management (excluding Chartwell), in each case primarily due to market-driven depreciation in asset values.  These declines were partially offset by incremental revenues arising from the acquisition of Chartwell.  We expect the increase in financial assets under management and assets in non-discretionary asset-based programs as of March 31, 2023 compared with December 31, 2022, which occurred due to equity market appreciation and net inflows during the quarter, to positively affect our fiscal third quarter of 2023, as the majority of our asset management and related administrative fees are billed based on balances as of the beginning of the quarter.Compensation expenses increased $5 million, or 11%, primarily due to the acquisition of Chartwell.  Non-compensation expenses decreased $2 million, or 2%, primarily due to lower investment sub-advisory fees resulting from the decrease in the beginning balance of assets under management in sub-advised programs, partially offset by incremental expenses resulting from the Chartwell acquisition.Net revenues of $423 million decreased 10% and pre-tax income of $162 million decreased 23%.Asset management and related administrative fees decreased $50 million, or 11%, driven by lower assets in non-discretionary asset-based programs and financial assets under management at AMS at the beginning of each of the current-year quarterly billing periods compared with the prior-year quarterly billing periods, as well as lower average financial assets under management at Raymond James Investment Management (excluding Chartwell), in each case primarily due to market-driven depreciation in asset values.  These declines were partially offset by incremental revenues arising from the acquisition of Chartwell.Compensation expenses increased $6 million, or 6%, primarily due to the acquisition of Chartwell.  Non-compensation expenses decreased $5 million, or 3% due to lower investment sub-advisory fees, resulting from the decrease in assets under management in sub-advised programs, partially offset by incremental expenses resulting from the Chartwell acquisition.
For an overview of our Bank segment operations, as well as a description of the key factors impacting our Bank segment results of operations, refer to the information presented in “Item 1 - Business” and “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2022 Form 10-K.  Our Bank segment results include the results of TriState Capital Bank since the acquisition date of June 1, 2022.
Net revenues of $540 million increased 174% and pre-tax income of $91 million increased 10%.Net interest income increased $341 million, or 180%, primarily due to the significant increase in short-term interest rates and higher average interest-earning assets at Raymond James Bank, as well as incremental net interest income from the June 1, 2022 acquisition of TriState Capital Bank.  The increase in average interest-earning assets at Raymond James Bank was primarily driven by growth in the bank loan portfolio and, to a lesser extent, higher average cash balances and available-for-sale securities.  The net interest margin increased to 3.63% from 2.01% for the prior-year quarter.  We anticipate that the Bank segment net interest income and net interest margin will decline during our fiscal third quarter of 2023 due to the higher level of cash balances held by the Bank segment as a result of recent market volatility, as well as the impact from higher-cost diversified funding sources, including the Enhanced Savings Program launched to PCG clients in March 2023.The bank loan provision for credit losses was $28 million for the current quarter, compared with $21 million for the prior-year quarter.  The current quarter provision primarily reflected the impacts of charge-offs of certain loans during the quarter, loan downgrades in the CRE and C&I loan portfolios, and additional volatility in the macroeconomic outlook.  The prior-year quarter provision for credit losses was primarily due to loan growth.Compensation expenses increased $34 million, or 243%, primarily due to incremental expenses of TriState Capital Bank.Non-compensation expenses, excluding the bank loan provision for credit losses, increased $294 million, or 372%, primarily due to an increase in RJBDP fees paid to PCG and incremental expenses of TriState Capital Bank.  RJBDP fees to PCG increased $262 million, or 535%, due to an increase in the market-based servicing fee incurred by the Bank segment for the administrative services provided by the PCG segment for such deposit balances, as well as an increase in client cash balances swept to our Bank segment as part of the RJBDP.  As described in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis - Results of Operations - Private Client Group”, our Bank segment incurs servicing fee expense, reflected as revenues in our PCG segment, for the administrative services provided related to our clients’ deposits that are swept to our Bank segment as part of the RJBDP.  These servicing fees are variable in nature and fluctuate based on client cash balances in the program, as well as the level of short-term interest rates and the interest paid to clients on balances in the RJBDP.  As the yield from third-party banks in the RJBDP program continues to rise, the rate the Bank segment incurs on RJBDP deposits will also increase as it reflects a market rate for such deposits.  These Bank segment fees and the revenues earned by the PCG segment are eliminated in consolidation.  Net revenues of $1.05 billion increased 176%, while pre-tax income of $227 million increased 23%.Net interest income increased $655 million, or 179%, due to the significant increase in short-term interest rates and higher average interest-earning assets at Raymond James Bank, as well as incremental net interest income from the acquisition of TriState Capital Bank.  The increase in average interest-earning assets at Raymond James Bank was primarily driven by higher average bank loans and an increase in average available-for-sale securities.  The net interest margin increased to 3.51% from 1.97% for the prior-year period.The bank loan provision for credit losses was $42 million for the current-year period, compared with $10 million for the prior-year period.  The current year provision for credit losses primarily reflected a weaker macroeconomic outlook, net charge-offs, and the impact of loan growth during the period.  The prior-year period provision primarily reflected the impact of loan growth.Non-compensation expenses, excluding the bank loan provision for credit losses, increased $533 million, or 337%, primarily due to an increase in RJBDP fees paid to PCG and incremental expenses associated with TriState Capital Bank.  RJBDP fees to PCG increased $480 million, or 485%, due to a significant increase in short-term interest rates as well as an increase in client cash swept to our Bank segment as part of the RJBDP.  These Bank segment fees and the revenues earned by the PCG segment are eliminated in consolidation.
This segment includes our private equity investments, interest income on certain corporate cash balances, certain costs incurred in acquisition activities, and certain corporate overhead costs of RJF that are not allocated to other segments, including the interest costs on our public debt.  For an overview of our Other segment operations, refer to the information presented in “Item 1 - Business” and “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our 2022 Form 10-K.
Pre-tax loss was $23 million compared with a pre-tax loss of $53 million for the prior-year quarter.Net revenues increased $28 million primarily due to an increase in interest income earned as a result of higher short-term interest rates applicable to our corporate cash balances.  Non-interest expenses decreased $2 million, primarily due to a decrease in acquisition-related expenses, partially offset by an increase in compensation expenses.The pre-tax loss was $5 million compared with a pre-tax loss of $100 million in the prior-year period.Net revenues increased $52 million, primarily due to an increase in interest income earned as a result of higher short-term interest rates applicable to our corporate cash balances, partially offset by an increase in interest expense due to the subordinated notes assumed as part of our acquisition of TriState Capital in June 2022.Non-interest expenses decreased $43 million, or 64%, primarily due to a $32 million insurance settlement received during the current-year period related to a previously settled litigation matter, which was reflected as an offset to Other expenses, as well as a decrease in acquisition-related expenses.  These decreases were partially offset by an increase in compensation expenses.
The assets on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition consisted primarily of cash and cash equivalents, assets segregated for regulatory purposes and restricted cash (primarily segregated for the benefit of clients), receivables including bank loans, financial instruments held either for trading purposes or as investments, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, and other assets.  A significant portion of our assets were liquid in nature, providing us with flexibility in financing our business.Total assets of $79.18 billion as of March 31, 2023 were $1.77 billion, or 2%, less than our total assets as of September 30, 2022.  Assets segregated for regulatory purposes and restricted cash decreased $3.78 billion, primarily due to a decrease in client cash sweep balances, which resulted in a decline in client cash held in our CIP and a corresponding decline in segregated assets.  Brokerage client receivables, collateralized agreements, and trading assets also decreased $359 million, $325 million, and $277 million, respectively, compared with September 30, 2022.  Partially offsetting these decreases was a $2.49 billion increase in cash and cash equivalents, driven by an increase in bank deposits, as well as an increase in bank loans, net of $444 million, primarily related to increases in corporate and residential mortgage loans, partially offset by a decline in securities-based loans.As of March 31, 2023, our total liabilities of $69.21 billion were $2.31 billion, or 3%, less than our total liabilities as of September 30, 2022.  Brokerage client payables decreased $4.60 billion related to the aforementioned decrease in CIP balances as of March 31, 2023.  Accrued compensation, commissions, and benefits decreased $326 million primarily due to the payment of prior-year bonuses.  These decreases were partially offset by an increase in bank deposits of $2.87 billion, primarily due to the launch of the Enhanced Savings Program to PCG clients in March 2023, which raised $2.75 billion of deposits during the period ended March 31, 2023, and an increase in other borrowings of $359 million as a result of a net increase in FHLB borrowings in the Bank segment during our fiscal second quarter of 2023.
Liquidity and capital are essential to our business.  The primary goal of our liquidity management activities is to ensure adequate funding and liquidity to conduct our business over a range of economic and market environments, including times of broader industry or market liquidity stress events.  In times of market stress or uncertainty, we generally maintain higher levels of capital and liquidity to ensure we have adequate funding to support our business.  We seek to manage capital levels to support execution of our business strategy, provide financial strength to our subsidiaries, and maintain sustained access to the capital markets, while at the same time meeting our regulatory capital requirements and conservative internal management targets.Liquidity and capital resources are provided primarily through our business operations and financing activities.  Financing activities could include bank borrowings, collateralized financing arrangements or additional capital raising activities under our “universal” shelf registration statement.  We believe our existing assets, most of which are liquid in nature, together with funds generated from operations and available from committed and uncommitted financing facilities, provide adequate funds for continuing operations at current levels of activity in the short-term.  We also believe that we will be able to continue to meet our long-term cash requirements due to our strong financial position and ability to access capital from financial markets.
Senior management establishes our liquidity and capital management frameworks.  Our liquidity and capital management frameworks are overseen by the RJF Asset and Liability Committee, a senior management committee that develops and executes strategies and policies to manage our liquidity risk and interest rate risk, as well as provides oversight over the firm’s investments.  Our liquidity management framework is designed to ensure we have a sufficient amount of financing, even when funding markets experience stress.  We manage the maturities and diversity of our funding across products and seek to maintain a diversified funding profile with an appropriate tenor, taking into consideration the characteristics and liquidity profile of our assets.  The liquidity management framework includes senior management’s review of short- and long-term cash flow forecasts, review of capital expenditures, monitoring of the availability of alternative sources of financing, and daily monitoring of liquidity in our significant subsidiaries.  Our decisions on the allocation of resources to our business units consider, among other factors, projected profitability, cash flow, risk, and future liquidity needs.  Our treasury department assists in evaluating, monitoring and controlling the impact that our business activities have on our financial condition and liquidity, and also maintains our relationships with various lenders.  The objective of our liquidity management framework is to support the successful execution of our business strategies while ensuring ongoing and sufficient liquidity. Our capital planning and capital risk management processes are governed by the Capital Planning Committee (“CPC”), a senior management committee that provides oversight on our capital planning and ensures that our strategic planning and risk management processes are integrated into the capital planning process.  The CPC meets at least quarterly to review key metrics related to the firm’s capital, such as debt structure and capital ratios; to analyze potential and emerging risks to capital; to oversee our annual firmwide capital stress test; and to propose capital actions to the Board of Directors, such as declaring dividends, repurchasing securities, and raising capital.  To ensure that we have sufficient capital to absorb unanticipated losses, the firm adheres to capital risk appetite statements and tolerances set in excess of regulatory minimums, which are established by the CPC and approved by the Board of Directors.  We conduct enterprise-wide capital stress testing to ensure that we maintain adequate capital to adhere to our established tolerances under multiple scenarios, including a stressed scenario.
Common equity (i.e., common stock, additional paid-in capital, and retained earnings) is the primary component of our capital structure.  Common equity allows for the absorption of losses on an ongoing basis and for the conservation of resources during stress periods, as it provides us with discretion on the amount and timing of dividends and other capital actions.  Information about our common equity is included in the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity, and Note 17 of this Form 10-Q.Under regulatory capital rules applicable to us as a bank holding company, we are required to maintain minimum leverage ratios (defined as tier 1 capital divided by adjusted average assets), as well as minimum ratios of tier 1 capital, CET1, and total capital to risk-weighted assets.  These capital ratios incorporate quantitative measures of our assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under the regulatory capital rules and are subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators about components, risk-weightings, and other factors.  We calculate these ratios in order to assess compliance with both regulatory requirements and internal capital policies.  In order to maintain our ability to take certain capital actions, including dividends and common equity repurchases, and to make bonus payments, we must hold a capital conservation buffer above our minimum risk-based capital requirements.  See Note 21 for further information about our regulatory capital and related capital ratios.We have classified all of our investments in debt securities as available-for-sale and have not classified any of our investments in debt securities as held-to-maturity.  Accordingly, we account for our available-for-sale securities at fair value at each reporting date, with unrealized gains and losses, net of tax, included in AOCI.  Current Basel III rules permit us to make an election to exclude most components of AOCI when calculating CET1, tier 1 capital, and total capital.  We have elected the AOCI opt-out for regulatory capital purposes and therefore exclude certain elements of AOCI, including gains/losses on our available-for-sale portfolio, from our capital calculations. Recent events impacting the financial services industry, including the failure of certain banks in the industry, may result in a change to regulations applicable to bank holding companies, including higher capital requirements, which could negatively impact our regulatory capital ratios in the future.  In addition, potential changes to the AOCI opt-out election would impact future regulatory capital calculations.  The following table presents the components of RJF’s regulatory capital used to calculate the aforementioned regulatory capital ratios.
The following table presents RJF’s risk-weighted assets by exposure type used to calculate the aforementioned regulatory capital ratios.
(1)RJF’s exposure is predominantly to the U.S. government and its agencies.
Cash and cash equivalents (excluding amounts segregated for regulatory purposes and restricted cash) of $8.66 billion at March 31, 2023 increased $2.49 billion compared with September 30, 2022.  The increase in cash and cash equivalents primarily resulted from an increase in bank deposits, including $2.75 billion of deposits from the launch of our Enhanced Savings Program to PCG clients in March 2023, as well as net proceeds from additional FHLB advances during the period, partially offset by common stock repurchases and dividends, investments in bank loans and available-for-sale securities, and the payment of prior-year bonuses.
Approximately $1.83 billion of our total March 31, 2023 cash and cash equivalents included cash held at the parent company, which included cash loaned to RJ&A.  As of March 31, 2023, RJF had loaned $1.16 billion to RJ&A (such amount is included in the RJ&A cash balance in the following table), which RJ&A has invested on behalf of RJF in cash and cash equivalents or otherwise deployed in its normal business activities.The following table presents our holdings of cash and cash equivalents.
Due to recent market volatility, we maintained a higher level of cash balances at Raymond James Bank and TriState Capital Bank as of March 31, 2023 compared with more recent periods as part of our liquidity management practices.RJF maintained depository accounts at Raymond James Bank and TriState Capital Bank totaling $275 million as of March 31, 2023.  The portion of this total that was available on demand without restrictions, which amounted to $234 million as of March 31, 2023, is reflected in the RJF cash balance and excluded from Raymond James Bank’s cash balance in the preceding table.A large portion of the cash and cash equivalents balances at our non-U.S. subsidiaries, including RJ Ltd., as of March 31, 2023 was held to meet regulatory requirements and was not available for use by the parent.In addition to the cash balances described, we have various other potential sources of cash available to the parent company from subsidiaries, as described in the following section.
Liquidity is principally available to RJF from RJ&A and Raymond James Bank.Certain of our broker-dealer subsidiaries are subject to the requirements of the Uniform Net Capital Rule (Rule 15c3-1) under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934.  As a member firm of the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (“FINRA”), RJ&A is subject to FINRA’s capital requirements, which are substantially the same as Rule 15c3-1.  Rule 15c3-1 provides for an “alternative net capital requirement,” which RJ&A has elected.  Regulations require that minimum net capital, as defined, be equal to the greater of $1.5 million or 2% of aggregate debit items arising from client balances.  In addition, covenants in RJ&A’s committed financing facilities require its net capital to be a minimum of 10% of aggregate debit items.  At March 31, 2023, RJ&A significantly exceeded the minimum regulatory requirements, the covenants in its financing arrangements pertaining to net capital, as well as its internally-targeted net capital tolerances.  FINRA may impose certain restrictions, such as restricting withdrawals of equity capital, if a member firm were to fall below a certain threshold or fail to meet minimum net capital requirements which may result in RJ&A limiting dividends it would otherwise remit to RJF.  We evaluate regulatory requirements, loan covenants and certain internal tolerances when determining the amount of liquidity available to RJF from RJ&A.Raymond James Bank may pay dividends to RJF without prior approval of its regulator as long as the dividends do not exceed the sum of its current calendar year and the previous two calendar years’ retained net income, and it maintains its targeted regulatory capital ratios.  Dividends may be limited to the extent that capital is needed to support balance sheet growth or as part of our liquidity and capital management activities. Although we have liquidity available to us from our other subsidiaries, the available amounts may not be as significant as those previously described and, in certain instances, may be subject to regulatory requirements.
We have various financing arrangements in place with third-party lenders that allow us the flexibility to borrow funds on a secured or unsecured basis to meet our liquidity needs.  We generally utilize these financing arrangements to finance a portion of our fixed income trading instruments held by RJ&A or for cash management purposes.  Our ability to borrow under these arrangements is dependent upon compliance with the conditions in our various loan agreements and, in the case of secured borrowings, collateral eligibility requirements.  As of March 31, 2023, RJF and RJ&A had the ability to borrow under our $500 million revolving credit facility agreement (the “Credit Facility”), a committed unsecured line of credit; however, we had no such borrowings outstanding under this facility as of March 31, 2023.  See our discussion of the Credit Facility in Note 16 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K for additional details on the Credit Facility.  In April 2023, we amended our Credit Facility, increasing the borrowing capacity to $750 million, extending the term through April 2028, adding the secured overnight financing rate (“SOFR”) as an alternative reference rate, decreasing our variable rate facility fee, and removing the previous $300 million sublimit for RJF.In addition to our Credit Facility, we have various uncommitted financing arrangements with third-party lenders, which are in the form of secured lines of credit, secured bilateral or tri-party repurchase agreements, or unsecured lines of credit.  Our uncommitted secured financing arrangements generally require us to post collateral in excess of the amount borrowed and are generally collateralized by RJ&A-owned securities or by securities that we have received as collateral under reverse repurchase agreements (i.e., securities purchased under agreements to resell).  As of March 31, 2023, we had outstanding borrowings under one uncommitted secured borrowing arrangement out of a total of 13 uncommitted financing arrangements (nine uncommitted secured and four uncommitted unsecured).  However, lenders are under no contractual obligation to lend to us under uncommitted credit facilities.Our borrowings on uncommitted financing arrangements, which were in the form of repurchase agreements in RJ&A, were included in “Collateralized financings” on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition.  The average daily balance outstanding during the five most recent quarters, the maximum month-end balance outstanding during the quarter and the period-end balances for repurchase agreements and reverse repurchase agreements are detailed in the following table.
We had $1.55 billion in FHLB borrowings outstanding at March 31, 2023, comprised of floating-rate and fixed-rate advances.  The interest rates on our floating-rate advances are generally based on a SOFR.  We use interest rate swaps to manage the risk of increases in interest rates associated with the majority of our floating-rate FHLB advances by converting the balances subject to variable interest rates to a fixed interest rate.  In March 2023, we increased our fixed-rate FHLB borrowings by $1 billion.  We repaid $500 million of such borrowings by March 31, 2023, with the remaining $500 million maturing on April 20, 2023.  We subsequently repaid $200 million of the borrowings maturing in April 2023, while extending the remaining $300 million until May 26, 2023 at a rate of 5.23%.During the quarter ended March 31, 2023, we increased our borrowing capacity with the FHLB through the pledge of additional available-for-sale securities.  At March 31, 2023, we had pledged $8.77 billion of bank loans, net and $4.64 billion of available-for-sale securities with the FHLB as security for the repayment of outstanding FHLB borrowings and to secure capacity for additional borrowings as needed.  As of March 31, 2023, we had an additional $9.07 billion in immediate credit available based on collateral pledged, which does include additional capacity created by the $200 million repayment of FHLB borrowings subsequent to quarter end, and with the pledge of additional collateral, we had additional credit availability from certain FHLB member banks.  See Notes 4, 6, 7, and 14 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for additional information regarding bank loans, net and available-for-sale securities pledged with the FHLB and for further information on our FHLB borrowings, including the related maturities and interest rates. A portion of our fixed income transactions are cleared through a third-party clearing organization, which provides financing for the purchase of trading instruments to support such transactions.  The amount of financing is based on the amount of trading inventory financed, as well as any deposits held at the clearing organization.  Amounts outstanding under this financing arrangement are collateralized by a portion of our trading inventory and accrue interest based on market rates.  While we had borrowings outstanding as of March 31, 2023, the clearing organization is under no contractual obligation to lend to us under this arrangement.Raymond James Bank and TriState Capital Bank have access to the Federal Reserve’s discount window and may have access to other lending programs that may be established by the Federal Reserve in unusual and exigent circumstances, including the Bank Term Funding Program that was created by the Federal Reserve on March 12, 2023; however, we do not view borrowings from the Federal Reserve as a primary source of funding.  See Note 6 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for additional information regarding bank loans, net pledged with the FRB. As part of the acquisition of TriState Capital, we assumed, as of the closing date, TriState Capital’s subordinated notes due 2030, with an aggregate principal amount of $98 million.  See Note 14 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q and Note 16 of our 2022 Form 10-K for additional information regarding these borrowings. We may act as an intermediary between broker-dealers and other financial institutions whereby we borrow securities from one broker-dealer and then lend them to another.  Where permitted, we have also loaned, to broker-dealers and other financial institutions, securities owned by clients or the firm.  We account for each of these types of transactions as collateralized agreements and financings, with the outstanding balance of $177 million as of March 31, 2023 related to the securities loaned included in “Collateralized financings” on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition of this Form 10-Q.  See Note 6 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q and Note 2 of our 2022 Form 10-K for more information on our collateralized agreements and financings.
At March 31, 2023, we had aggregate outstanding senior notes payable of $2.04 billion which, exclusive of any unaccreted premiums or discounts and debt issuance costs, was comprised of $500 million par 4.65% senior notes due 2030, $800 million par 4.95% senior notes due 2046, and $750 million par 3.75% senior notes due 2051.  See Note 17 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K for additional information on senior notes payable.
Our issuer, senior long-term debt, and preferred stock credit ratings as of the most current report are detailed in the following table.
(1)On March 17, 2023, Fitch Ratings, Inc. affirmed RJF’s issuer and senior long term debt A- rating, preferred stock BB+ rating, and stable rating outlook.(2)On February 13, 2023, Standard & Poor’s Rating Services upgraded RJF’s issuer and senior long-term debt from BBB+ to A- and changed the rating outlook to stable.Our current credit ratings depend upon a number of factors, including industry dynamics, operating and economic environment, operating results, operating margins, earnings trends and volatility, balance sheet composition, liquidity and liquidity management, capital structure, overall risk management, business diversification and market share, and competitive position in the markets in which we operate.  Deterioration in any of these factors could impact our credit ratings.  Any rating downgrades could increase our costs in the event we were to obtain additional financing.Should our credit rating be downgraded prior to a public debt offering, it is probable that we would have to offer a higher rate of interest to bond holders.  A downgrade to below investment grade may make a public debt offering difficult to execute on terms we would consider to be favorable.  A downgrade below investment grade could result in the termination of certain derivative contracts and the counterparties to the derivative instruments could request immediate payment or demand immediate and ongoing overnight collateralization on our derivative instruments in liability positions.  A credit downgrade could damage our reputation and result in certain counterparties limiting their business with us, result in negative comments by analysts, potentially negatively impact investors’ and/or clients’ perception of us and cause a decline in our stock price.  None of our borrowing arrangements contains a condition or event of default related to our credit ratings.  However, a credit downgrade would result in the firm incurring a higher facility fee on the Credit Facility, in addition to triggering a higher interest rate applicable to any borrowings outstanding on that line as of and subsequent to such downgrade.  Conversely, an improvement in RJF’s current credit rating could have a favorable impact on the facility fee, as well as the interest rate applicable to any borrowings on such line.
We have company-owned life insurance policies which are utilized to fund certain non-qualified deferred compensation plans and other employee benefit plans.  Certain of our non-qualified deferred compensation plans and other employee benefit plans are employee-directed while others are company-directed.  Of the company-owned life insurance policies which fund these plans, certain policies could be used as a source of liquidity for the firm.  Those policies against which we could readily borrow had a cash surrender value of $863 million as of March 31, 2023, comprised of $554 million related to employee-directed plans and $309 million related to company-directed plans, and we were able to borrow up to 90%, or $777 million, of the March 31, 2023 total without restriction.  To effect any such borrowing, the underlying investments would be converted to money market investments, therefore requiring us to take market risk related to the employee-directed plans.  There were no borrowings outstanding against any of these policies as of March 31, 2023.On May 12, 2021, we filed a “universal” shelf registration statement with the SEC pursuant to which we can issue debt, equity and other capital instruments if and when necessary or perceived by us to be opportune.  Subject to certain conditions, this registration statement will be effective through May 12, 2024. As part of our ongoing operations, we also enter into contractual arrangements that may require future cash payments, including certificates of deposit, lease obligations and other contractual arrangements, such as for software and various services.  See Notes 12 and 13 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for information regarding our lease obligations and certificates of deposit, respectively.  We have entered into investment commitments, lending commitments and other commitments to extend credit for which we are unable to reasonably predict the timing of future payments.  See Note 16 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for further information.
Refer to the discussion of the regulatory environment in which we operate and the impact on our operations of certain rules and regulations in “Item 1 - Business - Regulation” of our 2022 Form 10-K.RJF and many of its subsidiaries are each subject to various regulatory capital requirements.  As of March 31, 2023, all of our active regulated domestic and international subsidiaries had net capital in excess of minimum requirements.  In addition, RJF, Raymond James Bank, and TriState Capital Bank were categorized as “well-capitalized” as of March 31, 2023.  The maintenance of certain risk-based and other regulatory capital levels could influence various capital allocation decisions impacting one or more of our businesses.  However, due to the current capital position of RJF and its regulated subsidiaries, we do not anticipate these capital requirements will have a negative impact on our future business activities.  See Note 21 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and capital resources - Capital structure” of this Form 10-Q for further information on regulatory capital requirements.
The condensed consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which require us to make certain estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the reporting period.  Management has established detailed policies and control procedures intended to ensure the appropriateness of such estimates and assumptions and their consistent application from period to period.  For a description of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K.Due to their nature, estimates involve judgment based upon available information.  Actual results or amounts could differ from estimates and the difference could have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.  Therefore, understanding these critical accounting estimates is important in understanding our reported results of operations and financial position.  We believe that of our accounting estimates and assumptions, those described in the following sections involve a high degree of judgment and complexity.
The recorded amount of liabilities related to legal and regulatory matters is subject to significant management judgment.  For a description of the significant estimates and judgments associated with establishing such accruals, see the “Contingent liabilities” section of Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K.  In addition, refer to Note 16 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for information regarding legal and regulatory matters contingencies as of March 31, 2023.
We evaluate certain of our financial assets, including bank loans, to estimate an allowance for credit losses based on expected credit losses over a financial asset’s lifetime.  The remaining life of our financial assets is determined by considering contractual terms and expected prepayments, among other factors.  We use multiple methodologies in estimating an allowance for credit losses and our approaches differ by type of financial asset and the risk characteristics within each financial asset type.  Our estimates are based on ongoing evaluations of our financial assets, the related credit risk characteristics, and the overall economic and environmental conditions affecting the financial assets.  Our process for determining the allowance for credit losses includes a complex analysis of several quantitative and qualitative factors requiring significant management judgment due to matters that are inherently uncertain.  This uncertainty can produce volatility in our allowance for credit losses.  In addition, the allowance for credit losses could be insufficient to cover actual losses.  In such an event, any losses in excess of our allowance would result in a decrease in our net income, as well as a decrease in the level of regulatory capital.  We generally estimate the allowance for credit losses on bank loans using credit risk models which incorporate relevant available information from internal and external sources relating to past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable economic forecasts.  After testing the reasonableness of a variety of economic forecast scenarios, each model is run using a single forecast scenario selected for each model.  Our forecasts incorporate assumptions related to macroeconomic indicators including, but not limited to, U.S. gross domestic product, equity market indices, unemployment rates, and commercial real estate and residential home price indices.To demonstrate the sensitivity of credit loss estimates on our bank loan portfolio to macroeconomic forecasts, we compared our modeled estimates under the base case economic scenario used to estimate the allowance for credit losses as of March 31, 2023, to what our estimate would have been under a downside case scenario and an upside scenario, without considering any offsetting effects in the qualitative component of our allowance for credit losses as of March 31, 2023.  As of March 31, 2023, use of the downside case scenario would have resulted in an increase of approximately $200 million in the quantitative portion of our allowance for credit losses on bank loans, while the use of the upside case would have resulted in a reduction of approximately $40 million in the quantitative portion of our allowance for credit losses on bank loans at March 31, 2023.  These hypothetical outcomes reflect the relative sensitivity of the modeled portion of our allowance estimate to macroeconomic forecasted scenarios but do not consider any potential impact qualitative adjustments could have on the allowance for credit losses in such environments.  Qualitative adjustments could either increase or decrease modeled loss estimates calculated using an alternative economic scenario assumption.  Further, such sensitivity calculations do not necessarily reflect the nature and extent of future changes in the related allowance for a number of reasons including: (1) management’s predictions of future economic trends and relationships among the scenarios may differ from actual events; and (2) management’s application of subjective measures to modeled results through the qualitative portion of the allowance for credit losses when appropriate.  The downside case scenario utilized in this hypothetical sensitivity analysis assumes a moderate recession.  To the extent macroeconomic conditions worsen beyond those assumed in this downside case scenario, we could incur provisions for credit losses significantly in excess of those estimated in this analysis. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K for information regarding our methodologies and assumptions used in estimating the allowance for credit losses.  See Note 7 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for information regarding our allowance for credit losses related to bank loans as of March 31, 2023.
In March 2022, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued new guidance related to troubled debt restructurings and disclosures regarding write-offs of financing receivables (ASU 2022-02), amending guidance related to the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments (ASU 2016-13). The amendment eliminates the accounting guidance for troubled debt restructurings for creditors, but requires enhanced disclosures for certain loan refinancings and restructurings by creditors when a borrower is experiencing financial difficulty, and requires disclosure of current-period gross write-offs by year of origination for financing receivables. This new guidance is effective for our fiscal year beginning on October 1, 2023 and will be applied on a prospective basis.  Although permitted, we do not plan to early adopt.  We do not expect the adoption of this new guidance to have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In March 2023, the FASB issued amended guidance related to accounting for investments in tax credit structures using the proportional amortization method (ASU 2023-02).  The amendment permits reporting entities to elect to account for their tax equity investments using the proportional amortization method if certain conditions are met and makes the delayed equity contributions guidance applicable only when the proportional amortization method is applied to a tax equity investment. This amendment also requires entities to make disclosures about all investments in a tax credit program for which they have elected to account for using the proportional amortization method, including those investments in an elected tax credit program that do not meet the conditions to use the proportional amortization method.  This new guidance is effective for our fiscal year beginning on October 1, 2024.  This guidance may be applied on a retrospective basis or modified retrospective basis to all qualifying tax equity investments; however, the transition method must be applied consistently to all affected investments.  Although permitted, we do not currently plan to early adopt.  We are still evaluating the impact the adoption of this new guidance will have on our financial position, results of operations, and disclosures.
Risks are an inherent part of our business and activities.  Management of risk is critical to our fiscal soundness and profitability.  Our risk management processes are multi-faceted and require communication, judgment, and knowledge of financial products and markets.  We have a formal Enterprise Risk Management (“ERM”) program to assess and review aggregate risks across the firm.  Our management takes an active role in the ERM process, which requires specific administrative and business functions to participate in the identification, assessment, monitoring, and control of various risks.The principal risks related to our business activities are market, credit, liquidity, operational, model, and compliance.
Our Board of Directors, including its Risk Committee and Audit Committee, oversees the firm’s management and mitigation of risk, reinforcing a culture that encourages ethical conduct and risk management throughout the firm.  Senior management communicates and reinforces this culture through three lines of risk management and a number of senior-level management committees.  Our first line of risk management, which includes all of our businesses, owns its risks and is responsible for identifying, mitigating, and escalating risks arising from its day-to-day activities.  The second line of risk management, which includes Compliance and Risk Management, advises our client-facing businesses and other first-line functions in identifying, assessing, and mitigating risk.  The second line of risk management tests and monitors the effectiveness of controls, as deemed necessary, and escalates risks when appropriate to senior management and the Board of Directors.  The third line of risk management, Internal Audit, independently reviews activities conducted by the previous lines of risk management to assess their management and mitigation of risk, providing additional assurance to the Board of Directors and senior management, with a view toward enhancing our oversight, management, and mitigation of risk.  Our legal department provides legal advice and guidance to each of these three lines of risk management.
Market risk is our risk of loss resulting from the impact of changes in market prices on our trading inventory, derivatives, and investment positions.  We have exposure to market risk primarily through our broker-dealer trading operations and our banking operations.  Through our broker-dealer subsidiaries, we trade debt obligations and equity securities and maintain trading inventories to ensure availability of securities to facilitate client transactions.  Inventory levels may fluctuate daily as a result of client demand.  We also hold investments within our available-for-sale securities portfolio, and from time to time may hold SBA loan securitizations not yet transferred.  Our primary market risks relate to interest rates, equity prices, and foreign exchange rates.  Interest rate risk results from changes in levels of interest rates, the volatility of interest rates, mortgage prepayment speeds, and credit spreads.  Equity risk results from changes in prices of equity securities.  Foreign exchange risk results from changes in spot prices, forward prices, and volatility of foreign exchange rates.  See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K and Notes 3, 4, and 5 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for fair value and other information regarding our trading inventories, available-for-sale securities, and derivative instruments.We regularly enter into underwriting commitments and, as a result, we may be subject to market risk on any unsold shares issued in the offerings to which we are committed.  Risk exposure is controlled by limiting our participation, the transaction size, or through the syndication process.The Market Risk Management department is responsible for measuring, monitoring, and reporting market risks associated with the firm’s trading and derivative portfolios.  While Market Risk Management maintains ongoing communication with the revenue-generating business units, it is independent of such units.
We are exposed to interest rate risk as a result of our trading inventory (primarily comprised of fixed income instruments) in our Capital Markets segment.  Changes in value of our trading inventory may result from fluctuations in interest rates, credit spreads, equity prices, macroeconomic factors, investor expectations or risk appetites, liquidity, as well as dynamic relationships among these factors.  We actively manage interest rate risk arising from our fixed income trading inventory through the use of hedging strategies utilizing U.S. Treasuries, exchange traded funds, futures contracts, liquid spread products, and derivatives.Our primary method for controlling risks within trading inventories is through the use of dollar-based and exposure-based limits.  A hierarchy of limits exists at multiple levels, including firm, business unit, desk (e.g., for equities, corporate bonds, municipal bonds), product sub-type (e.g., below-investment-grade positions) and, at times, at the individual position.  For derivative positions, which are primarily comprised of interest rate swaps, we have established sensitivity-based and foreign exchange spot limits.  Trading positions and derivatives are monitored against these limits through daily reports that are distributed to senior management. During volatile markets, we may temporarily reduce limits and/or choose to pare our trading inventories to reduce risk.We monitor Value-at-Risk (“VaR”) for all of our trading portfolios on a daily basis for risk management purposes and as a result of applying the Fed’s Market Risk Rule (“MRR”) for the purpose of calculating our capital ratios.  The MRR, also known as the “Risk-Based Capital Guidelines: Market Risk” rule released by the Fed, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the FDIC, requires us to calculate VaR for all of our trading portfolios, including fixed income, equity, derivatives, and foreign exchange instruments.  VaR is an appropriate statistical technique for estimating potential losses in trading portfolios due to typical adverse market movements over a specified time horizon with a suitable confidence level.  However, there are inherent limitations of utilizing VaR including: historical movements in markets may not accurately predict future market movements; VaR does not take into account the liquidity of individual positions; VaR does not estimate losses over longer time horizons; and extended periods of one-directional markets potentially distort risks within the portfolio.  In addition, should markets become more volatile, actual trading losses may exceed VaR results presented on a single day and might accumulate over a longer time horizon.  As a result, management complements VaR with sensitivity analysis and stress testing and employs additional controls such as a daily review of trading results, review of aged inventory, independent review of pricing, monitoring of concentrations, and review of issuer ratings.To calculate VaR, we use models which incorporate historical simulation.  This approach assumes that historical changes in market conditions, such as in interest rates and equity prices, are representative of future changes.  Simulation is based on daily market data for the previous twelve months.  VaR is reported at a 99% confidence level for a one-day time horizon.  Assuming that future market conditions change as they have in the past twelve months, we would expect to incur losses greater than those predicted by our one-day VaR estimates about once every 100 trading days, or about three times per year on average.  For regulatory capital calculation purposes, we also report VaR and Stressed VaR numbers for a ten-day time horizon.  The VaR model is independently reviewed by our Model Risk Management function.  See “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Model risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K for further information.The modeling of the risk characteristics of trading positions involves a number of assumptions and approximations that management believes to be reasonable.  However, there is no uniform industry methodology for estimating VaR, and different assumptions or approximations could produce materially different VaR estimates.  As a result, VaR results are more reliable when used as indicators of risk levels and trends within a firm than as a basis for inferring differences in risk-taking across firms. The following table sets forth the high, low, period-end and average daily one-day VaR for all of our trading portfolios, including fixed income and equity instruments, and for our derivatives for the periods and dates indicated.
Average daily VaR was higher during the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 compared with the three and six months ended March 31, 2022 due to the impact of increased market volatility during the period, as well as the addition of the SumRidge Partners trading inventory beginning in July 2022.  Period-end VaR was lower at March 31, 2023 compared to September 30, 2022, due to a decline in trading inventory.The Fed’s MRR requires us to perform daily back-testing procedures for our VaR model, whereby we compare each day’s projected VaR to its regulatory-defined daily trading losses, which exclude fees, commissions, reserves, net interest income, and intraday trading.  Regulatory-defined daily trading losses are used to evaluate the performance of our VaR model and are not comparable to our actual daily net revenues.  Based on these daily “ex ante” versus “ex post” comparisons, we determine whether the number of times that regulatory-defined daily trading losses exceed VaR is consistent with our expectations at a 99% confidence level.  During the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, our regulatory-defined daily losses in our trading portfolios exceeded our predicted VaR on one occasion.Separately, RJF provides additional market risk disclosures to comply with the MRR, including 10-day VaR and 10-day Stressed VaR, which are available on our website at https://www.raymondjames.com/investor-relations/financial-information/filings-and-reports within “Other Reports and Information.”
Our Bank segment maintains an interest-earning asset portfolio that is comprised of cash, SBL, C&I loans, commercial and residential real estate loans, REIT loans, and tax-exempt loans, as well as securities held in the available-for-sale securities portfolio.  These interest-earning assets are primarily funded by client deposits.  Based on the current asset portfolio, our banking operations are subject to interest rate risk.  We analyze interest rate risk based on forecasted net interest income, which is the net amount of interest received and interest paid, and the net portfolio valuation, both across a range of interest rate scenarios.One of the objectives of the Asset and Liability Committee is to manage the sensitivity of net interest income to changes in market interest rates.  This committee uses several measures to monitor and limit interest rate risk in our banking operations, including scenario analysis and economic value of equity (“EVE”).  We utilize a hedging strategy using interest rate swaps in our banking operations as a result of our asset and liability management process.  For further information regarding this hedging strategy, see Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K and Notes 13 and 14 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q.To ensure that we remain within the tolerances established for net interest income, a sensitivity analysis of net interest income to interest rate conditions is estimated under a variety of scenarios.  We use simulation models and estimation techniques to assess the sensitivity of net interest income to movements in interest rates.  The model estimates the sensitivity by calculating interest income and interest expense in a dynamic balance sheet environment using current repricing, prepayment, and reinvestment of cash flow assumptions over a 12-month time horizon.  Assumptions used in the model include interest rate movement, the slope of the yield curve, and balance sheet composition and growth.  The model also considers interest rate-related risks such as pricing spreads, pricing of client cash accounts, including deposit betas, and prepayments.  Various interest rate scenarios are modeled in order to determine the effect those scenarios may have on net interest income.The following table is an analysis of our banking operations’ estimated net interest income over a 12-month period based on instantaneous shifts in interest rates (expressed in basis points) using our previously described asset/liability model, which assumes a dynamic balance sheet and that interest rates do not decline below zero.  While not presented, additional rate scenarios are performed, including interest rate ramps and yield curve shifts that may more realistically mimic the speed of potential interest rate movements.  We also perform simulations on time horizons of up to five years to assess longer-term impacts to various interest rate scenarios.  On a quarterly basis, we test expected model results to actual performance.  Additionally, any changes made to key assumptions in the model are documented and approved by the Asset and Liability Committee.
(1)   Our 0-basis point scenario was based on interest rates as of March 31, 2023 and did not include the impact of the Fed’s May 4, 2023 increase in its benchmark short-term rate. Refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Net interest analysis” of this Form 10-Q for a discussion of the impact changes in short-term interest rates could have on the consolidated firm’s operations.  The Asset and Liability Committee also reviews EVE, which is a point in time analysis of current interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities that incorporates all cash flows over their estimated remaining lives, discounted at current rates.  The EVE approach is based on a static balance sheet and provides an indicator of future earnings and capital levels as the changes in EVE indicate the anticipated change in the value of future cash flows.  We monitor sensitivity to changes in EVE utilizing Board of Directors-approved limits.  These limits set a risk tolerance to changing interest rates and assist in determining strategies for mitigating this risk as EVE approaches these limits.  As of March 31, 2023, our EVE analyses were within approved limits.The following table shows the maturities of our bank loan portfolio at March 31, 2023, including contractual principal repayments.  Maturities are generally determined based upon contractual terms; however, rollovers or extensions that are included for the purposes of measuring the allowance for credit losses are reflected in maturities in the following table.  This table does not include any estimates of prepayments, which could shorten the average loan lives and cause the actual timing of the loan repayments to differ significantly from those shown in the table.
The following table shows the distribution of the recorded investment of those bank loans that mature in more than one year between fixed and adjustable interest rate loans at March 31, 2023.
Contractual loan terms for SBL, C&I loans, CRE loans, REIT loans, and residential mortgage loans may include an interest rate floor, cap and/or fixed interest rates for a certain period of time, which would impact the timing of the interest rate reset for the respective loan.  See the discussion within the “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Credit risk - Risk monitoring process” section of this Form 10-Q for additional information regarding our interest-only residential mortgage loan portfolio.In our available-for-sale securities portfolio, we hold primarily fixed-rate agency-backed MBS, agency-backed CMOs, and U.S. Treasuries, which are carried at fair value on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, with changes in the fair value of the portfolio recorded through OCI on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.  At March 31, 2023, our available-for-sale securities portfolio had a fair value of $9.77 billion with a weighted-average yield of 2.03% and a weighted-average life of 4.38 years.  The effective duration of our available-for-sale securities portfolio as of March 31, 2023 was approximately 3.65, where duration is defined as the approximate percentage change in price for a 100-basis point change in rates.  See Note 4 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for additional information on our available-for-sale securities portfolio.
We are exposed to equity price risk as a result of our capital markets activities.  Our broker-dealer activities are generally client-driven, and we carry equity securities as part of our trading inventory to facilitate such activities, although the amounts are not as significant as our fixed income trading inventory.  We attempt to reduce the risk of loss inherent in our inventory of equity securities by monitoring those security positions each day and establishing position limits.  Equity securities held in our trading inventory are generally included in VaR.In addition, we have a private equity portfolio, included in “Other investments” on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Financial Condition, which is primarily comprised of investments in third-party funds.  See Note 3 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for additional information on this portfolio.
We are subject to foreign exchange risk due to our investments in foreign subsidiaries as well as transactions and resulting balances denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar.  For example, our bank loan portfolio includes loans which are denominated in Canadian dollars, totaling $1.54 billion and $1.51 billion at March 31, 2023 and September 30, 2022, respectively, when converted to the U.S. dollar.  A majority of such loans are held in a Canadian subsidiary of Raymond James Bank, which is discussed in the following sections.
Raymond James Bank has an investment in a Canadian subsidiary, resulting in foreign exchange risk.  To mitigate its foreign exchange risk, Raymond James Bank utilizes short-term, forward foreign exchange contracts.  These derivatives are primarily accounted for as net investment hedges in the condensed consolidated financial statements.  See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K and Note 5 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for further information regarding these derivatives.At March 31, 2023, we had foreign exchange risk in our investment in RJ Ltd. of CAD 413 million and in our investment in Charles Stanley of £274 million, which were not hedged.  All of our other investments, consisting primarily of subsidiaries located in Europe, are not hedged, and we do not believe we had material foreign exchange risk either individually, or in the aggregate, pertaining to these subsidiaries as of March 31, 2023.  Foreign exchange gains/losses related to our foreign investments are primarily reflected in OCI on our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.  See Note 17 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for further information regarding our components of OCI.
We are subject to foreign exchange risk due to our holdings of cash and certain other assets and liabilities resulting from transactions denominated in a currency other than the U.S. dollar.  Any currency-related gains/losses arising from these foreign currency denominated balances are reflected in “Other” revenues in our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.  The foreign exchange risk associated with a portion of such transactions and balances denominated in foreign currency are mitigated utilizing short-term, forward foreign exchange contracts.  Such derivatives are not designated hedges and therefore, the related gains/losses are included in “Other” revenues in our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income.  See Note 5 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for information regarding our derivatives.
Credit risk is the risk of loss due to adverse changes in a borrower’s, issuer’s, or counterparty’s ability to meet its financial obligations under contractual or agreed-upon terms.  The nature and amount of credit risk depends on the type of transaction, the structure and duration of that transaction, and the parties involved.  Credit risk is an integral component of the profit assessment of lending and other financing activities.  See further discussion of our credit risk, including how we manage such risk, in “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Credit risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K.
We maintain cash balances with the Fed and with various financial institutions, primarily global systemically important banks, in our normal course of business.  A large portion of such balances are in excess of FDIC insurance limits.  As a result, we may be exposed to the risk that these financial institutions may not return our cash to us in the event that the institution experiences financial distress or ceases its operations.  In order to mitigate our credit risk to such financial institutions, we monitor our exposure with each institution on a daily basis and subject each institution to limits based on various factors including but not limited to financial strength, capitalization levels, liquidity, credit ratings, and market factors to the extent applicable.
We are engaged in various trading and brokerage activities in which our counterparties primarily include broker-dealers, banks, exchanges, clearing organizations, and other financial institutions.  We are exposed to risk that these counterparties may not fulfill their obligations.  In addition, certain commitments, including underwritings, may create exposure to individual issuers and businesses.  The risk of default depends on the creditworthiness of the counterparty and/or the issuer of the instrument.  In addition, we may be subject to concentration risk if we hold large positions in or have large commitments to a single counterparty, borrower, or group of similar counterparties or borrowers (e.g., in the same industry).  We seek to mitigate these risks by imposing and monitoring individual and aggregate position limits within each business segment for each counterparty, conducting regular credit reviews of financial counterparties, reviewing security, derivative and loan concentrations, holding and calculating the fair value of collateral on certain transactions and conducting business through clearing organizations, which may guarantee performance.  See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K and Notes 5 and 6 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for further information about our credit risk mitigation related to derivatives and collateralized agreements. Our client activities involve the execution, settlement, and financing of various transactions on behalf of our clients.  Client activities are transacted on either a cash or margin basis.  Credit exposure results from client margin loans, which are monitored daily and are collateralized by the securities in the clients’ accounts.  We monitor exposure to industry sectors and individual securities and perform analysis on a daily basis in connection with our margin lending activities.  We adjust our margin requirements if we believe our risk exposure is not appropriate based on market conditions.  In addition, when clients execute a purchase, we are at some risk that the client will default on their financial obligation associated with the trade.  If this occurs, we may have to liquidate the position at a loss.  See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K for further information about our determination of the allowance for credit losses associated with certain of our brokerage lending activities. We offer loans to financial advisors for recruiting and retention purposes.  We have credit risk and may incur a loss primarily in the event that such borrower is no longer affiliated with us.  See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K and Note 8 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for further information about our loans to financial advisors.
Our Bank segment has a substantial loan portfolio.  Our strategy for credit risk management related to bank loans includes well-defined credit policies, uniform underwriting criteria, and ongoing risk monitoring and review processes for all credit exposures.  The strategy also includes diversification across loan types, geographic location, industry and client level, regular credit examinations and management reviews of all corporate and tax-exempt loans as well as individual delinquent residential loans.  The credit risk management process also includes annual independent reviews of the credit risk monitoring process that performs assessments of compliance with credit policies, risk ratings, and other critical credit information.  We seek to identify potential problem loans early, record any necessary risk rating changes and charge-offs promptly, and maintain appropriate reserve levels for expected losses.  We utilize a thorough credit risk rating system to measure the credit quality of individual corporate and tax-exempt loans and related unfunded lending commitments.  For our residential mortgage loans and substantially all of our SBL, we utilize the credit risk rating system used by bank regulators in measuring the credit quality of each homogeneous class of loans.  In evaluating credit risk, we consider trends in loan performance, historical experience through various economic cycles, industry or client concentrations, the loan portfolio composition and macroeconomic factors (both current and forecasted).  These factors have a potentially negative impact on loan performance and net charge-offs.While our bank loan portfolio is diversified, a significant downturn in the overall economy, deterioration in real estate values or a significant issue within any sector or sectors where we have a concentration will generally result in large provisions for credit losses and/or charge-offs.  We determine the allowance required for specific loan pools based on relative risk characteristics of the loan portfolio.  On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our methods for determining the allowance for each class of loans and make enhancements we consider appropriate.  Our allowance for credit losses methodology is described in Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements of our 2022 Form 10-K.  As our bank loan portfolio is segregated into six portfolio segments, likewise, the allowance for credit losses is segregated by these same segments.  See “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Credit risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K for further information about the risk characteristics relevant to each portfolio segment.The level of charge-off activity is a factor that is considered in evaluating the potential severity of future credit losses.  The following table presents net loan (charge-offs)/recoveries and the annualized percentage of net loan (charge-offs)/recoveries to the average outstanding loan balances by loan portfolio segment.
(1)    Net charge-offs during the three and six months ended March 31, 2023 were primarily related to two C&I loans.  The level of nonperforming assets is another indicator of potential future credit losses.  Nonperforming assets are comprised of both nonperforming loans and other real estate owned.  Nonperforming loans include those loans which have been placed on nonaccrual status and certain accruing loans which are 90 days or more past due and in the process of collection.  The following table presents the balance of nonperforming loans, nonperforming assets, and related key credit ratios.
(1)    Nonperforming loans at March 31, 2023 and September 30, 2022 included $90 million and $63 million of loans, respectively, which were current pursuant to their contractual terms.The nonperforming loan balances in the preceding table excluded $6 million and $7 million as of March 31, 2023 and September 30, 2022, respectively, of residential troubled debt restructurings which were returned to accrual status in accordance with our policy. Although our nonperforming assets as a percentage of our Bank segment’s assets remained low as of March 31, 2023, any prolonged period of market deterioration could result in an increase in our nonperforming assets, an increase in our allowance for credit losses and/or an increase in net charge-offs in future periods, although the extent would depend on future developments that are highly uncertain.
Our underwriting policies for the major types of bank loans are described in “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Credit risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K.
Another component of credit risk strategy for our bank loan portfolio is the ongoing risk monitoring and review processes, including our internal loan review process, as well as our rigorous processes to manage and limit credit losses arising from loan delinquencies.  There are various other factors included in these processes, depending on the loan portfolio.  There were no significant changes to those processes during the three months ended March 31, 2023.
Substantially all collateral securing our SBL portfolio is monitored on a daily basis.  Collateral adjustments, as triggered by our monitoring procedures, are made by the borrower as necessary to ensure our loans are adequately secured, resulting in minimizing our credit risk.  Collateral calls have been minimal relative to our SBL portfolio with insignificant losses incurred to date.We track and review many factors to monitor credit risk in our residential mortgage loan portfolio.  The factors include, but are not limited to: loan performance trends, loan product parameters and qualification requirements, borrower credit scores, level of documentation, loan purpose, geographic concentrations, average loan size, risk rating, and LTV ratios.  See Note 7 of the Notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements of this Form 10-Q for additional information about our residential mortgage loan portfolio.The following table presents a summary of delinquent residential mortgage loans, the vast majority of which are first mortgage loans, which are comprised of loans which are two or more payments past due as well as loans in the process of foreclosure.
Our March 31, 2023 percentage compares favorably to the national average for over 30 day delinquencies of 2.03%, as most recently reported by the Fed.Credit risk is also managed by diversifying the residential mortgage portfolio.  Most of the loans in our residential loan portfolio are to PCG clients across the U.S.  The following table details the geographic concentrations (top five states) of our one-to-four family residential mortgage loans.
The occurrence of a natural disaster or severe weather event in any of these states, for example wildfires in California and hurricanes in Florida, could result in additional credit loss provisions and/or charge-offs on our loans in such states and therefore negatively impact our net income and regulatory capital in any given period. Loans where borrowers may be subject to payment increases include adjustable rate mortgage loans with terms that initially require payment of interest only.  Payments may increase significantly when the interest-only period ends and the loan principal begins to amortize.  At March 31, 2023 and September 30, 2022, these loans totaled $2.71 billion and $2.55 billion, respectively, or approximately 34% and 35% of the residential mortgage portfolio, respectively.  The weighted-average number of years before the remainder of the loans, which were still in their interest-only period at March 31, 2023, begins amortizing is six years.
Credit risk in our corporate and tax-exempt loan portfolios is monitored on an individual loan basis.  The majority of our tax-exempt loan portfolio is comprised of loans to investment-grade borrowers.  Credit risk is managed by diversifying the corporate bank loan portfolio.  Our corporate bank loan portfolio does not contain a significant concentration in any single industry.  The following table details the industry concentrations (top five categories) of our corporate bank loans.
The Fed’s measures to control inflation, including through increases in short-term interest rates, have had an impact on consumer behavior and are likely to continue to do so in the near-term.  These and related factors could negatively impact our borrowers, particularly those in consumer-facing industries.  In response to changing trends, and industry-wide challenges following the COVID-19 pandemic, we have closely monitored each loan in our commercial real estate portfolio, particularly office real estate, utilizing LTV ratios and other metrics.  We have also focused on reducing our corporate loan exposure in certain sectors with increasing credit concerns, including selling approximately $430 million of loans subsequent to March 31, 2023 through May 5, 2023 at an average sales price of 99% of par value.  Additional sales of corporate loans may be made during the remainder of fiscal 2023 to further reduce credit risk in certain sectors.  In addition, we plan to be prudent in issuing new corporate loans for the remainder of fiscal 2023 as a result of the recent market volatility.
See the section “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and capital resources” of this Form 10-Q for information regarding our liquidity and how we manage liquidity risk.
Operational risk generally refers to the risk of loss resulting from our operations, including, but not limited to, business disruptions, improper or unauthorized execution and processing of transactions, deficiencies in our technology or financial operating systems and inadequacies or breaches in our control processes, including cybersecurity incidents.  See “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Operational risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K for a discussion of our operational risk and certain of our risk mitigation processes.Periods of severe market volatility can result in a significantly higher level of transactions on specific days, which may present operational challenges from time to time that may result in losses.  These losses can result from, but are not limited to, trade errors, failed transaction settlements, late collateral calls to borrowers and counterparties, or interruptions to our system processing.  We did not incur any significant losses related to such operational challenges during the six months ended March 31, 2023.As more fully described in the discussion of our business technology risks included in various risk factors presented in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” of our 2022 Form 10-K, despite our implementation of protective measures and endeavoring to modify them as circumstances warrant, our computer systems, software and networks may be vulnerable to human error, natural disasters, power loss, cyber-attacks and other information security breaches, and other events that could have an impact on the security and stability of our operations.
Model risk refers to the possibility of unintended business outcomes arising from the design, implementation or use of models.  See “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Model risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K for information regarding how we utilize models throughout the firm and how we manage model risk.
Compliance risk is the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or reputational damage that the firm may suffer from a failure to comply with applicable laws, external standards, or internal requirements.  See “Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Risk management - Compliance risk” of our 2022 Form 10-K for information on our compliance risks, including how we manage such risks.