
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q contains statements (including certain projections and business trends) that are “forward-looking statements” as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Words such as “believe”, “estimate”, “project”, “plan”, “expect”, “anticipate”, “will”, “intend”, and other similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements. Actual results may differ materially from those projected as a result of certain risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, including but not limited to:•the availability and price of components and materials;•macroeconomic factors, including inflation, global and regional business conditions (including adverse impacts in certain markets, such as Oil & Gas), commodity prices, currency exchange rates, the cyclical nature of our customers’ capital spending, and sovereign debt concerns;•the severity and duration of disruptions to our business due to pandemics (including the COVID-19 pandemic), natural disasters (including those as a result of climate change), acts of war (including the Russia and Ukraine conflict), strikes, terrorism, social unrest or other causes, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to manage it on the global economy, liquidity and financial markets, demand for our hardware and software products, solutions, and services, our supply chain, our work force, our liquidity, and the value of the assets we own;•our ability to attract, develop, and retain qualified personnel;•the availability, effectiveness, and security of our information technology systems; •our ability to manage and mitigate the risk related to security vulnerabilities and breaches of our hardware and software products, solutions, and services;•the successful integration and management of strategic transactions and achievement of the expected benefits of these transactions;•laws, regulations, and governmental policies affecting our activities in the countries where we do business, including those related to tariffs, taxation, trade controls (including sanctions placed on Russia), cybersecurity, and climate change;•the successful development of advanced technologies and demand for and market acceptance of new and existing hardware and software products;•our ability to manage and mitigate the risks associated with our solutions and services businesses; •the successful execution of our cost productivity initiatives; •competitive hardware and software products, solutions, and services, pricing pressures, and our ability to provide high quality products, solutions, and services;•the availability and cost of capital;•disruptions to our distribution channels or the failure of distributors to develop and maintain capabilities to sell our products;•intellectual property infringement claims by others and the ability to protect our intellectual property; •the uncertainty of claims by taxing authorities in the various jurisdictions where we do business; •the uncertainties of litigation, including liabilities related to the safety and security of the hardware and software products, solutions, and services we sell; •risks associated with our investment in common stock of PTC Inc., including the potential for volatility in our reported quarterly earnings associated with changes in the market value of such stock; •our ability to manage costs related to employee retirement and health care benefits; and•other risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to those detailed from time to time in our Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) filings. These forward-looking statements reflect our beliefs as of the date of filing this report. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events, or otherwise. See Item 1A. Risk Factors, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2022, for more information.
The following discussion includes organic sales, total segment operating earnings and margin, adjusted income, adjusted EPS, adjusted effective tax rate, and free cash flow, which are non-GAAP measures. See Supplemental Sales Information for a reconciliation of reported sales to organic sales and a discussion of why we believe this non-GAAP measure is useful to investors. See Summary of Results of Operations for a reconciliation of Income before income taxes to total segment operating earnings and margin and a discussion of why we believe these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors. See Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS, and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation for a reconciliation of Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation, diluted EPS, and effective tax rate to adjusted income, adjusted EPS, and adjusted effective tax rate, respectively, and a discussion of why we believe these non-GAAP measures are useful to investors. See Financial Condition for a reconciliation of Cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow and a discussion of why we believe this non-GAAP measure is useful to investors.
Rockwell Automation, Inc. is a global leader in industrial automation and digital transformation. We connect the imaginations of people with the potential of technology to expand what is humanly possible, making the world more productive and more sustainable. Overall demand for our hardware and software products, solutions, and services is driven by:•investments in manufacturing, including upgrades, modifications and expansions of existing facilities or production lines, and new facilities or production lines;•investments in basic materials production capacity, which may be related to commodity pricing levels;•our customers’ needs for faster time to market, operational productivity, asset management and reliability, and enterprise risk management;•our customers’ needs to continuously improve quality, safety, and sustainability;•industry factors that include our customers’ new product introductions, demand for our customers’ products or services, and the regulatory and competitive environments in which our customers operate;•levels of global industrial production and capacity utilization;•regional factors that include local political, social, regulatory, and economic circumstances; and•the spending patterns of our customers due to their annual budgeting processes and their working schedules.
Our strategy is to bring The Connected Enterprise(R) to life by integrating control and information across the enterprise. We deliver customer outcomes by combining advanced industrial automation with the latest information technology. Our growth and performance strategy seeks to:•achieve organic sales growth in excess of the automation market by expanding our served market and strengthening our competitive differentiation;•grow market share of our core platforms;•drive double digit growth in information solutions and connected services;•drive double digit growth in annual recurring revenue (ARR);•acquire companies that serve as catalysts to organic growth by increasing our information solutions and connected services offerings and capabilities, advanced material handling, and expanding our global presence;•enhance our market access by building our channel capability and partner network;•deploy human and financial resources to strengthen our technology leadership and our intellectual capital business model;•continuously improve quality and customer experience; and•drive annual cost productivity.By implementing the above strategy, we seek to achieve our long-term financial goals, including above-market organic sales growth, increasing the portion of our total revenue that is recurring in nature, EPS growth above sales growth, return on invested capital in excess of 20 percent, and free cash flow equal to about 100 percent of adjusted income. We expect acquisitions to add a percentage point or more per year to long-term sales growth.Our customers face the challenge of remaining globally cost competitive and automation can help them achieve their productivity and sustainability objectives. Our value proposition is to help our customers reduce time to market, lower total cost of ownership, improve asset utilization, and manage enterprise risks.
In the second quarter of 2023, sales in the U.S. accounted for over half of our total sales. The various indicators we use to gauge the direction and momentum of our served U.S. markets include:•The Industrial Production (IP) Index, published by the Federal Reserve, which measures the real output of manufacturing, mining, and electric and gas utilities. The IP Index is expressed as a percentage of real output in a base year, currently 2017. Historically, there has been a meaningful correlation between the changes in the IP Index and the level of automation investment made by our U.S. customers in their manufacturing base.•The Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI), published by the Institute for Supply Management (ISM), which indicates the current and near-term state of manufacturing activity in the U.S. According to the ISM, a PMI measure above 50 indicates that the U.S. manufacturing economy is generally expanding while a measure below 50 indicates that it is generally contracting.The table below depicts trends in these indicators since the quarter ended September 2021. These figures are as of April 27, 2023, and are subject to revision by the issuing organizations. The IP Index increased in each month of the second quarter of 2023 but the quarter as a whole was little changed versus the first quarter of 2023. Manufacturing PMI results were soft in the second quarter of 2023. The Manufacturing PMI reading in the month of March was the lowest of the quarter and was the fifth consecutive month below 50.
Inflation in the U.S. has also had an impact on our input costs and pricing. We used the Producer Price Index (PPI), published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which measures the average change over time in the selling prices received by domestic producers for their output. PPI for March 31, 2023, December 31, 2022, September 30, 2022, June 30, 2022, March 31, 2022, and December 31, 2021, increased 2.7 percent, 6.6 percent, 8.5 percent, 11.2 percent, 11.7 percent, and 10.0 percent, respectively, compared to the same period of the prior year. These figures are as of April 27, 2023, and are subject to revision by the issuing organization. Although higher than historic measures, the PPI year over year increase has declined over the past four quarters.
In the second quarter of 2023, sales to customers outside the U.S. accounted for less than half of our total sales. These customers include both indigenous companies and multinational companies with a global presence. In addition to the global factors previously mentioned in the Overview section, international demand, particularly in emerging markets, has historically been driven by the strength of the industrial economy in each region, investments in infrastructure, and expanding consumer markets. We use changes in key countries' gross domestic product (GDP), IP, and PMI as indicators of the growth opportunities in each region where we do business.Industrial output outside the U.S. was mostly higher in the second quarter of 2023 after declining in the first quarter of 2023. PMI readings were mostly lower in the second quarter of 2023 and readings for many countries ended the quarter below 50. Supply chain disruptions, labor shortages, and global inflation remain persistent, along with elevated geopolitical instability.
We have a global supply chain, including a network of suppliers and distribution and manufacturing facilities. The supply chain has been stressed by increased demand, along with pandemic-related and other global events that have put additional pressures on manufacturing output. Although there has been a continued gradual improvement in the supply chain environment, this has resulted in and could continue to result in:•challenges in our supply chain;•difficulty in procuring or inability to procure components and materials necessary for our hardware and software products, solutions, and services;•increased costs for commodities and components; and•delays in delivering, or an inability to deliver, our hardware and software products, solutions, and services.We are closely managing our end-to-end supply chain, from sourcing to production to customer delivery, with a particular focus on all critical and at-risk suppliers and supplier locations globally. We have made large-scale investments to increase capacity across our network in support of our orders growth. Additional actions we are taking include:•extending order visibility to our supply base to ensure we are appropriately planning for extended component lead times;•securing longer-term supply agreements with critical partners;•re-engineering of existing products to increase component supply resiliency;•capacity investments, including redundant manufacturing lines and additional electronic assembly equipment; and•qualification of additional suppliers to diversify our supplier base.We believe these and other actions we are taking will over time normalize our product lead times and reduce our backlog.
We continue to monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and geographies. Uncertainty on the duration and severity of those impacts remains due to the evolving nature of the pandemic, government responses to it, and regulations across the geographies in which our business operates. We are continuously responding to the changing conditions created by the pandemic and evolving regulations and remain focused on our priorities including employee health and safety, our customer needs, and protecting critical investments to drive long-term differentiation.
The table below provides guidance for sales growth and earnings per share for 2023 as of April 27, 2023. Our updated guidance reflects first half performance and record backlog. It also assumes continued improvement in electronic component availability.
(1) Organic sales growth and adjusted EPS are non-GAAP measures. See Supplemental Sales Information and Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS, and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation for more information on these non-GAAP measures.
The following table reflects our sales and operating results (in millions, except per share amounts and percentages):
(1) See Note 15 in the Consolidated Financial Statements for the definition of segment operating earnings.(2) Total segment operating earnings and total segment operating margin are non-GAAP financial measures. We exclude purchase accounting depreciation and amortization, corporate and other, non-operating pension and postretirement benefit cost, change in fair value of investments, interest expense, net, and income tax (provision) benefit because we do not consider these items to be directly related to the operating performance of our segments. We believe total segment operating earnings and total segment operating margin are useful to investors as measures of operating performance. We use these measures to monitor and evaluate the profitability of our operating segments. Our measures of total segment operating earnings and total segment operating margin may be different from measures used by other companies.(3) Adjusted EPS is a non-GAAP earnings measure. See Adjusted Income, Adjusted EPS, and Adjusted Effective Tax Rate Reconciliation for more information on this non-GAAP measure.
Sales increased 25.8 percent and 16.1 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Organic sales increased 27.3 percent and 18.5 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Currency translation decreased sales by 2.8 percentage points and 3.5 percentage points year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Acquisitions increased sales by 1.3 percentage points and 1.1 percentage points year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Pricing increased total company sales by approximately 6.5 percentage points and 7.0 percentage points in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, realized in the Intelligent Devices and Software & Control segments.The tables below present our sales, attributed to the geographic regions based upon country of destination, and the percentage change from the same period a year ago (in millions, except percentages). The results by region and segment were primarily impacted by component availability and the composition of backlog versus underlying demand.
(1) Organic sales and organic sales growth exclude the effect of acquisitions, changes in currency exchange rates, and divestitures. See Supplemental Sales Information for information on these non-GAAP measures.
Corporate and other expenses were $29.2 million and $56.5 million in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, compared to $24.6 million and $54.0 million in the three and six months ended March 31, 2022, respectively. The increase was primarily due to mark-to-market adjustments related to our deferred and non-qualified compensation plans.
Income before income taxes was $351.4 million and $819.3 million in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, compared to $41.1 million and $323.6 million in the three and six months ended March 31, 2022, respectively. The increase was primarily due to higher sales and fair value adjustments recognized in 2023 compared to 2022 in connection with our investment in PTC (the "PTC adjustments"), partially offset by higher non-operating pension expense.Total segment operating earnings increased 70.8 percent in the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to higher sales volume, including pricing increases, partially offset by higher incentive compensation and investment spend. Total segment operating earnings increased 38.6 percent in the six months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to higher sales volume, including pricing increases, partially offset by higher investment spend, incentive compensation, and input costs.
The effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was 16.1 percent compared to (20.2) percent for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the PTC adjustments and non-U.S. tax rates. Our adjusted effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023, was 17.4 percent compared to 16.0 percent for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase in the adjusted effective tax rate was primarily due to non-U.S. tax rates.The effective tax rate for the six months ended March 31, 2023, was 17.8 percent compared to 10.9 percent for the six months ended March 31, 2022. The increase in the effective tax rate was primarily due to the PTC adjustments, non-U.S. tax rates, and lower discrete benefits in the current year. Our adjusted effective tax rate for the six months ended March 31, 2023, was 17.3 percent compared to 15.6 percent for the six months ended March 31, 2022. The increase in the adjusted effective tax rate was primarily due to lower discrete benefits in the current year.
2023 second quarter Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation was $300.3 million or $2.59 per share, compared to $53.9 million or $0.46 per share in the second quarter of 2022. The increases in Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation and diluted EPS were primarily due to higher sales and pre-tax margin. Pre-tax margin was 15.4 percent in the second quarter of 2023 compared to 2.3 percent in the same period last year. The increase in pre-tax margin was primarily due to higher sales and the PTC adjustments, partially offset by higher non-operating pension expense. 2023 second quarter adjusted EPS was $3.01, up 81.3 percent compared to $1.66 in the second quarter of 2022, primarily due to higher sales and segment operating margin. Total segment operating margin in the second quarter of 2023 was 21.3 percent compared to 15.7 percent a year ago primarily due to higher sales volume, including pricing increases, partially offset by higher incentive compensation and investment spend.Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation was $684.3 million or $5.90 per share in the six months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $295.4 million or $2.51 per share in the six months ended March 31, 2022. The increases in Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation and diluted EPS were primarily due to higher sales and pre-tax margin. Pre-tax margin was 19.2 percent in the six months ended March 31, 2023, compared to 8.8 percent in the same period last year. The increase in pre-tax margin was primarily due to higher sales and the PTC adjustments, partially offset by higher non-operating pension expense. Adjusted EPS was $5.48 in the six months ended March 31, 2023, up 44.6 percent compared to $3.79 in the six months ended March 31, 2022. The increase in adjusted EPS was primarily due to higher sales and segment operating margin. Total segment operating margin in the six months ended March 31, 2023, was 20.8 percent compared to 17.4 percent in the same period a year ago primarily due to higher sales volume, including pricing increases, partially offset by higher investment spend, incentive compensation, and input costs.
Intelligent Devices sales increased 26.5 percent and 14.7 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Intelligent Devices organic sales increased 26.8 percent and 16.2 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Currency translation decreased sales by 2.7 percentage points and 3.4 percentage points year over year, in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. The acquisition of CUBIC increased sales by 2.4 percentage points and 1.9 percentage points year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. For the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, reported and organic sales increased in all regions.
Intelligent Devices segment operating earnings increased 75.0 percent year over year in the three months ended March 31, 2023. Segment operating margin increased to 20.2 percent in the three months ended March 31, 2023, from 14.6 percent in the same period a year ago. The increase from the prior year includes higher sales volume, including the impact from price, partially offset by higher investment spend and incentive compensation. Intelligent Devices segment operating earnings increased 25.7 percent year over year in the six months ended March 31, 2023. Segment operating margin increased to 21.2 percent in the six months ended March 31, 2023, from 19.4 percent in the same period a year ago. The increase from the prior year includes higher sales volume, including the impact from price, partially offset by higher investment spend, unfavorable currency impact, higher input costs, and higher incentive compensation.
Software & Control sales increased 38.5 percent and 25.3 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Software & Control organic sales increased 41.6 percent and 28.8 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Currency translation decreased sales by 3.1 percentage points and 3.5 percentage points year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. For the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, reported and organic sales increased in all regions.
Software & Control segment operating earnings increased 89.6 percent and 67.2 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Segment operating margin increased to 33.6 percent and 31.7 percent in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, from 24.6 percent and 23.8 percent in the same period a year ago, primarily driven by higher sales volume, including the impact from price, partially offset by higher investment spend and incentive compensation.
Lifecycle Services sales increased 10.0 percent and 8.3 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Lifecycle Services organic sales increased 11.7 percent and 11.0 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Currency translation decreased sales by 2.5 percentage points and 3.3 percentage points year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Acquisitions increased sales by 0.8 percentage points and 0.6 percentage points year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. All regions experienced growth in reported and organic sales in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, except for Latin America.
Lifecycle Services segment operating earnings decreased 17.2 percent and 10.3 percent year over year in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively. Segment operating margin decreased to 5.5 percent and 5.3 percent in the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, from 7.3 percent and 6.4 percent in the same period a year ago. The benefit of higher sales was more than offset by higher incentive compensation costs and one-time items to expand future profitability.
Purchase accounting depreciation and amortization and non-operating pension and postretirement benefit cost are not allocated to our operating segments because these costs are excluded from our measurement of each segment's operating performance for internal purposes. If we were to allocate these costs, we would attribute them to each of our segments as follows (in millions):
Adjusted income, adjusted EPS, and adjusted effective tax rate are non-GAAP earnings measures that exclude non-operating pension and postretirement benefit cost, purchase accounting depreciation and amortization attributable to Rockwell Automation, change in fair value of investments, and Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests, including their respective tax effects. Non-operating pension and postretirement benefit cost is defined as all components of our net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost except for service cost. See Note 10 in the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information on our net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost.We believe that adjusted income, adjusted EPS, and adjusted effective tax rate provide useful information to our investors about our operating performance and allow management and investors to compare our operating performance period over period. Adjusted EPS is also used as a financial measure of performance for our annual incentive compensation. Our measures of adjusted income, adjusted EPS, and adjusted effective tax rate may be different from measures used by other companies. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered a substitute for Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation, diluted EPS, and effective tax rate. The following are reconciliations of Net income attributable to Rockwell Automation, diluted EPS, and effective tax rate to adjusted income, adjusted EPS, and adjusted effective tax rate, respectively (in millions, except per share amounts and percentages):
(1) Includes settlement expense of $117.9 million for the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, and $24.9 million for the three and six months ended March 31, 2022.(2) Primarily relates to the change in fair value of investment in PTC.
(1) Fiscal 2023 guidance based on adjusted income attributable to Rockwell, which includes an adjustment for SLB's non-controlling interest in Sensia.(2) The actual year-to-date adjustments, which are based on PTC's share price at March 31, 2023, and year-to-date sales of PTC Shares, are used for guidance, as estimates of these adjustments on a forward-looking basis are not available due to variability, complexity, and limited visibility of these items.(3) Year-to-date pension settlement charges are used for guidance, as estimates of these adjustments on a forward-looking basis are not available due to variability, complexity, and limited visibility of these items. (4) Guidance as of April 27, 2023.
The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows (in millions):
The following table summarizes free cash flow, which is a non-GAAP financial measure (in millions):
Our definition of free cash flow takes into consideration capital investments required to maintain the operations of our businesses and execute our strategy. Cash provided by operating activities adds back non-cash depreciation expense to earnings but does not reflect a charge for necessary capital expenditures. Our definition of free cash flow excludes the operating cash flows and capital expenditures related to our discontinued operations, if any. Operating, investing, and financing cash flows of our discontinued operations, if any, are presented separately in our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. In our opinion, free cash flow provides useful information to investors regarding our ability to generate cash from business operations that is available for acquisitions and other investments, service of debt principal, dividends, and share repurchases. We use free cash flow, as defined, as one measure to monitor and evaluate our performance, including as a financial measure for our annual incentive compensation. Our definition of free cash flow may be different from definitions used by other companies.Cash provided by operating activities was $253.4 million for the six months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $78.8 million for the six months ended March 31, 2022. Free cash flow was $197.7 million for the six months ended March 31, 2023, compared to $(3.2) million for the six months ended March 31, 2022. The year over year increases in cash provided by operating activities and free cash flow were primarily due to higher pre-tax income and lower income tax payments in the first six months of 2023 compared to the first six months of 2022, partially offset by increases in working capital.In December 2021, the Company entered a 10b5-1 plan related to our PTC Shares, pursuant to which a broker makes periodic sales of some of our PTC Shares on behalf of the Company, subject to the terms of the plan. Starting in June 2022, the Company made periodic sales of our PTC Shares in the open market, outside of the parameters of the existing 10b5-1 plan. In December 2022, the original 10b5-1 plan was completed and a new 10b5-1 plan related to our PTC Shares was entered into by the Company. All of our sales of PTC Shares are consistent with the transfer restrictions in the securities purchase agreement, as amended, with PTC. As of March 31, 2023 and 2022, the fiscal year-to-date sales of our PTC shares under our 10b5-1 plan and open market sales resulted in a gross inflow of $205.2 million and $1.3 million, respectively. This excludes any tax liability related to the realized gain on investment. These proceeds, and any proceeds from future sales, will support our future uses of cash.Our Short-term debt as of March 31, 2023, and September 30, 2022, includes commercial paper borrowings of $434.5 million and $317.0 million, respectively, with weighted average interest rates of 4.84 percent and 3.03 percent, respectively, and weighted average maturity periods of 13 days and 22 days, respectively. In December 2022, Sensia entered into an unsecured $75.0 million line of credit. As of March 31, 2023, included in Short-term debt was $50.0 million borrowed against the line of credit with an interest rate of 5.78 percent. Also included in Short-term debt as of March 31, 2023, and September 30, 2022, is $23.5 million and $42.3 million, respectively, of interest-bearing loans from SLB to Sensia, due December 29, 2023.We repurchased approximately 0.8 million shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program in the first six months of 2023. The total cost of these shares was $194.4 million, of which $0.8 million was recorded in Accounts payable at March 31, 2023, related to shares that did not settle until April 2023. At September 30, 2022, there were $1.6 million of outstanding common stock share repurchases recorded in Accounts payable. We repurchased approximately 0.2 million shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program in the first six months of 2022. The total cost of these shares was $49.4 million. At March 31, 2022, there were no outstanding common stock share repurchases recorded in Accounts payable. Our decision to repurchase shares in the remainder of 2023 will depend on business conditions, free cash flow generation, other cash requirements, and stock price. On both July 24, 2019, and May 2, 2022, the Board of Directors authorized us to expend an additional $1.0 billion to repurchase shares of our common stock. At March 31, 2023, we had approximately $1,056.9 million remaining for share repurchases under our existing board authorizations. See Part II, Item 2. Unregistered Sales of Equity Securities and Use of Proceeds, for additional information regarding share repurchases.We expect future uses of cash to include working capital requirements, capital expenditures, additional contributions to our retirement plans, acquisitions of businesses and other inorganic investments, dividends to shareowners, repurchases of common stock, and repayments of debt. We expect to fund future uses of cash with a combination of existing cash balances, cash generated by operating activities, commercial paper borrowings, or new issuances of debt or other securities. In addition, we have access to unsecured credit facilities with various banks.At March 31, 2023, the majority of our Cash and cash equivalents were held by non-U.S. subsidiaries. As a result of the broad changes to the U.S. international tax system under the Tax Act, the Company accounts for taxes on earnings of substantially all of its non-U.S. subsidiaries including both non-U.S. and U.S. taxes. The Company has concluded that earnings of a limited number of its non-U.S. subsidiaries are indefinitely reinvested.In June 2022, we replaced our former $1.25 billion unsecured revolving credit facility with a new five-year $1.5 billion unsecured revolving credit facility, expiring in June 2027. We can increase the aggregate amount of this credit facility by up to $750.0 million, subject to the consent of the banks in the credit facility. We did not borrow against this credit facility or the former credit facility during the periods ended March 31, 2023, or September 30, 2022. Borrowings under this credit facility bear interest based on short-term money market rates in effect during the period the borrowings are outstanding. The terms of this credit facility contain covenants under which we agree to maintain an EBITDA-to-interest ratio of at least 3.0 to 1.0. The EBITDA-to-interest ratio is defined in the credit facility as the ratio of consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the facility) for the preceding four quarters to consolidated interest expense for the same period.LIBOR was the primary basis for determining interest payments on borrowings under our former $1.25 billion credit facility. Our new $1.5 billion credit facility uses the secured overnight funding rate (SOFR) as the primary basis for determining interest payments.Among other uses, we can draw on our credit facility as a standby liquidity facility to repay our outstanding commercial paper as it matures. This access to funds to repay maturing commercial paper is an important factor in maintaining the short-term credit ratings set forth in the table below. Under our current policy with respect to these ratings, we expect to limit our other borrowings under our credit facility, if any, to amounts that would leave enough credit available under the facility so that we could borrow, if needed, to repay all of our then outstanding commercial paper as it matures.Separate short-term unsecured credit facilities of approximately $217.9 million at March 31, 2023, were available to non-U.S. subsidiaries, of which, approximately $30.7 million was committed under letters of credit. Borrowings under our non-U.S. credit facilities at March 31, 2023, and September 30, 2022, were not significant. We were in compliance with all covenants under our credit facilities at March 31, 2023, and September 30, 2022. There are no significant commitment fees or compensating balance requirements under our credit facilities.The following is a summary of our credit ratings as of March 31, 2023:
Our ability to access the commercial paper market, and the related costs of these borrowings, is affected by the strength of our credit ratings and market conditions. We have not experienced any difficulty in accessing the commercial paper market. If our access to the commercial paper market is adversely affected due to a change in market conditions or otherwise, we would expect to rely on a combination of available cash and our unsecured committed credit facility to provide short-term funding. In such event, the cost of borrowings under our unsecured committed credit facility could be higher than the cost of commercial paper borrowings.We regularly monitor the third-party depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments. We diversify our cash and cash equivalents among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these entities.We use foreign currency forward exchange contracts to manage certain foreign currency risks. We enter into these contracts to hedge our exposure to foreign currency exchange rate variability in the expected future cash flows associated with certain third-party and intercompany transactions denominated in foreign currencies forecasted to occur within the next two years. We also use these contracts to hedge portions of our net investments in certain non-U.S. subsidiaries against the effect of exchange rate fluctuations on the translation of foreign currency balances to the U.S. dollar. In addition, we use foreign currency forward exchange contracts that are not designated as hedges to offset transaction gains or losses associated with some of our assets and liabilities resulting from intercompany loans or other transactions with third parties that are denominated in currencies other than our entities' functional currencies. Our foreign currency forward exchange contracts are usually denominated in currencies of major industrial countries. We diversify our foreign currency forward exchange contracts among counterparties to minimize exposure to any one of these entities.Net gains and losses related to derivative forward exchange contracts designated as cash flow hedges offset the related gains and losses on the hedged items during the periods in which the hedged items are recognized in earnings. During the three and six months ended March 31, 2023, we reclassified $7.7 million and $20.4 million, respectively, in pre-tax net gains related to cash flow hedges from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into the Consolidated Statement of Operations. During the three and six months ended March 31, 2022, we reclassified $1.2 million in pre-tax net gains and $0.6 million in pre-tax net losses, respectively, related to cash flow hedges from Accumulated other comprehensive loss into the Consolidated Statement of Operations. As of March 31, 2023, we expect that approximately $15.7 million of pre-tax net unrealized gains on cash flow hedges will be reclassified into earnings during the next 12 months.Information with respect to our contractual cash obligations is contained in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2022. We believe that at March 31, 2023, there has been no material change to this information.
We translate sales of subsidiaries operating outside of the United States using exchange rates effective during the respective period. Therefore, changes in currency exchange rates affect our reported sales. Sales by acquired businesses also affect our reported sales. We believe that organic sales, defined as sales excluding the effects of acquisitions and changes in currency exchange rates, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, provides useful information to investors because it reflects regional and operating segment performance from the activities of our businesses without the effect of acquisitions and changes in currency exchange rates. We use organic sales as one measure to monitor and evaluate our regional and operating segment performance. When we acquire businesses, we exclude sales in the current period for which there are no comparable sales in the prior period. We determine the effect of changes in currency exchange rates by translating the respective period’s sales using the same currency exchange rates that were in effect during the prior year. When we divest a business, we exclude sales in the prior period for which there are no comparable sales in the current period. Organic sales growth is calculated by comparing organic sales to reported sales in the prior year, excluding divestitures. We attribute sales to the geographic regions based on the country of destination.The following is a reconciliation of reported sales to organic sales by geographic region (in millions):
The following is a reconciliation of reported sales to organic sales by operating segment (in millions):
We have prepared the Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, which require us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the Consolidated Financial Statements and revenues and expenses during the periods reported. These estimates are based on our best judgment about current and future conditions, but actual results could differ from those estimates. Information with respect to accounting estimates that are the most critical to the understanding of our financial statements as they could have the most significant effect on our reported results and require subjective or complex judgments by management is contained in Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2022. We believe that at March 31, 2023, there has been no material change to this information, except as noted below.
We perform our annual evaluation of goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment in the second quarter each year. This year we also performed a quantitative impairment test for our Sensia reporting unit. We determined the fair value of the Sensia reporting unit under a combination of an income approach derived from discounted cash flows and a market multiples approach using selected comparable public companies.Critical assumptions used in this approach included management’s estimated future revenue growth rates and margins, a discount rate, and a market multiple. Estimated future revenue growth and margins are based on management’s best estimate about current and future conditions. The revenue growth rate assumption reflects significant growth over the next five years before moderating back to a growth rate approximating longer term average inflationary rates. The forecasted near-term growth rate assumes that revenue will return to pre-pandemic levels due to the abatement of pandemic and supply chain related disruptions. Margin assumptions reflect that recent cost pressure related to inflation and supply chain challenges will be compensated through pricing achieved on future orders. We believe the assumptions and estimates made were reasonable and appropriate, which are based on a number of factors, including historical experience, reference to external product available market and industry growth publications, analysis of peer group projections, and information obtained from reporting unit management, including backlog. Actual results and forecasts of revenue growth and margins for our Sensia reporting unit may be impacted by its concentration within the Oil & Gas industry and with its customer base. Demand for Sensia hardware and software products, solutions, and services is sensitive to industry volatility and risks, including those related to commodity prices, supply and demand dynamics, production costs, geological activity, and political activities. If such factors impact our ability to achieve forecasted revenue growth rates and margins, the fair value of the reporting unit could decrease, which may result in an impairment. We determined the discount rate using our weighted average cost of capital adjusted for risk factors including risk associated with our above market revenue growth assumptions, historical performance, and industry-specific and economic factors. Additionally, industry-specific and economic factors that increase the discount rate or decrease the market multiple can decrease the fair value of the Sensia reporting unit, which may result in an impairment.Based on these assumptions and estimates, the fair value of the Sensia reporting unit exceeded its carrying value by approximately 10 percent. We also assessed the changes in events and circumstances subsequent to our annual test and concluded that no triggering events, which would require interim quantitative testing, occurred. Therefore, as of March 31, 2023, we deemed that no impairment existed on $317.5 million of Goodwill allocated to the Sensia reporting unit.
In March 2023, we remeasured our U.S. pension plan assets and liabilities in accordance with U.S GAAP settlement accounting rules. The discount rate used in the remeasurement was 5.25 percent compared to 5.65 percent at our September 30, 2022, annual measurement date. The 5.25 percent discount rate was set as of a March 31, 2023, measurement date and was determined by modeling a portfolio of bonds that match the expected cash flow of our benefit plans. See Note 10 in the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the settlement accounting.
Information with respect to the effect of compliance with environmental protection requirements and resolution of environmental claims on us and our manufacturing operations is contained in Note 17 in the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended September 30, 2022. We believe that at March 31, 2023, there has been no material change to this information.
See Note 1 in the Consolidated Financial Statements regarding recent accounting pronouncements.