
You should read the following discussion in conjunction with Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 (“Annual Report”) as filed on February 27, 2023 with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) and the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report.
This report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the federal securities laws. In addition, we, or our executive officers on our behalf, may from time to time make forward-looking statements in reports and other documents we file with the SEC or in connection with oral statements made to the press, potential investors or others. All statements that are not historical facts are “forward-looking statements.” Forward-looking statements may be indicated by words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plans,” “expects,” “projects,” “should,” “will,” “believes” or “intends” and similar words and phrases. These statements reflect management’s current beliefs and are not guarantees of future performance. They involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied in any forward-looking statement. Such risks and uncertainties include any ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, financial results and liquidity, which will depend on numerous evolving factors that we cannot accurately predict or assess, including: any negative impact on global and regional markets, economies and economic activity, our customers, suppliers, and business partners, and how quickly and whether economies and demand for our products and services recover.Examples of forward-looking statements in this report include but are not limited to statements regarding operating results, the success of our operating plans, our expectations regarding our ability to generate cash and reduce debt and associated interest expense, profit and cash flow expectations, the prospects for newly acquired businesses to be integrated and contribute to future growth and our expectations regarding growth through acquisitions. Important assumptions relating to the forward-looking statements include, among others, demand for our products, the cost, timing and success of product upgrades and new product introductions, raw material costs, expected pricing levels, expected outcomes of pending litigation, competitive conditions and general economic conditions. These assumptions could prove inaccurate. Although we believe that the estimates and projections reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, our expectations may prove to be incorrect. Important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from estimates or projections contained in the forward-looking statements include but are not limited to:•general economic conditions;•difficulty making acquisitions and successfully integrating acquired businesses;•any unforeseen liabilities associated with future acquisitions;•failure to effectively mitigate cybersecurity threats, including any litigation arising therefrom;•failure to comply with new data privacy laws and regulations, including any litigation arising therefrom;•risks and costs associated with our international sales and operations;•rising interest rates;•limitations on our business imposed by our indebtedness;•product liability, litigation, and insurance risks;•future competition;•the cyclical nature of some of our markets;•reduction of business with large customers;•risks associated with government contracts;•changes in the supply of, or price for, labor, energy, raw materials, parts and components, including as a result of impacts from the current inflationary environment, supply chain constraints or additional or ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic;•potential write-offs of our goodwill and other intangible assets;•our ability to successfully develop new products;•failure to protect our intellectual property;•unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates;•difficulties associated with exports/imports and risks of changes to tariff rates;•increased warranty exposure;•environmental compliance costs and liabilities;•the effect of, or change in, government regulations (including tax);•economic disruption caused by armed conflicts (such as the war in Ukraine), terrorist attacks, health crises (such as the COVID-19 pandemic) or other unforeseen geopolitical events; and•the factors discussed in other reports we file with the SEC from time to time.You should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which are based on current expectations. Further, forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update any of these statements in light of new information or future events.
Roper is a diversified technology company. Roper has a proven, long-term, successful track record of compounding cash flow and shareholder value. We operate market leading businesses that design and develop vertical software and technology enabled products for a variety of defensible niche markets.We pursue consistent and sustainable growth in revenue, earnings and cash flow by enabling continuous improvement in the operating performance of our businesses and by acquiring other businesses that offer high value-added software, services, technology-enabled products and solutions that we believe are capable of achieving growth and maintaining high margins.
Roper has completed the divestitures of TransCore, Zetec, CIVCO Radiotherapy (“2021 Divestitures”), and the majority stake in its industrial businesses (“Indicor” or “Indicor Transaction”). The financial results for these businesses are reported as discontinued operations for all periods presented. Unless otherwise noted, discussion within these notes to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements relates to continuing operations. Refer to Note 4 for additional information on discontinued operations.
There were no material changes during the three months ended March 31, 2023 to the items that we disclosed as our critical accounting policies and estimates in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report.
Percentages may not sum due to rounding. The following table sets forth selected information for the periods indicated.
Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 14.8% as compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022. The components of revenue growth for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were as follows:
In our Application Software segment, revenues were $761.4 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $628.2 in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The growth of 5.9% in organic revenues was broad-based across the segment led by our businesses serving government contracting, higher education, legal and property and casualty insurance markets. Gross margin decreased to 68.4% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 69.3% in the three months ended March 31, 2022 due primarily to headcount to support growth, and a higher mix of SaaS and professional service revenue across a number of businesses. SG&A expenses increased as a percentage of revenue to 43.0% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 41.9% in the three months ended March 31, 2022 due primarily to higher amortization of acquired intangibles from the Frontline acquisition. The resulting operating margin was 25.4% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 27.4% in the three months ended March 31, 2022.In our Network Software segment, revenues were $354.5 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $338.5 in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The growth of 6.0% in organic revenues was led by our network software businesses serving the freight match, life insurance and alternate site healthcare markets. Gross margin increased to 84.5% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 84.2% in the three months ended March 31, 2022 due to operating leverage on higher organic revenues. SG&A expenses decreased as a percentage of revenues at 42.8% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 43.8% in the three months ended March 31, 2022 due to operating leverage on higher organic revenues combined with revenue mix. As a result, operating margin was 41.6% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 40.4% in the three months ended March 31, 2022.In our Technology Enabled Products segment, revenues were $353.8 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $313.1 in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The growth of 13.7% in organic revenues was led by our water meter technology and medical products businesses. Gross margin decreased to 56.2% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 56.5% in the three months ended March 31, 2022 due primarily to revenue mix partially offset by operating leverage on higher organic sales. SG&A expenses as a percentage of revenues decreased to 23.5% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 24.7% in the three months ended March 31, 2022 due primarily to operating leverage on higher organic revenues. The resulting operating margin was 32.6% in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 31.8% in the three months ended March 31, 2022.Corporate expenses increased to $55.2, or 3.8% of revenues, in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $52.9, or 4.1% of revenues, in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The dollar increase was due primarily to higher professional services expense partially offset by lower compensation expense.Net interest expense decreased to $37.4 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $52.6 for the three months ended March 31, 2022 due to higher interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents and lower weighted average debt balances.Equity investment activity, net was $1.2 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 due to non-cash stock compensation runoff expenses for Indicor employees which will not recur.Other expense, net, of $2.3 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was composed primarily of foreign exchange losses at our non-U.S. based subsidiaries. Other expense, net, of $2.1 for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was composed primarily of a one-time charge associated with a transaction to transfer the remainder of our exposure related to asbestos claims within the Indicor parameter to a third party, partially offset by foreign exchange gains at our non-U.S. based subsidiaries.Income taxes as a percent of pretax earnings were 21.0% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to 21.5% for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The rate was primarily impacted by an increase in research and development (R&D) tax credit utilization and a benefit from foreign-derived intangible income.Backlog is equal to our remaining performance obligations expected to be recognized within the next 12 months as discussed in Note 11 of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements. Backlog increased 17% to $2,872.5 at March 31, 2023 as compared to $2,455.6 at March 31, 2022. Organic growth in backlog was 13% and acquisitions contributed 5% which was partially offset by foreign exchange impact of 1%.
Selected cash flows for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were as follows:
Operating activities - Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations increased by 5% to $464.9 in the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $441.3 in the three months ended March 31, 2022, due to higher net income from continuing operations net of non-cash expenses. These cash inflows were partially offset by less cash provided by working capital primarily due to the timing of SaaS renewals primarily associated with Frontline and cash payment of $45.0 million related to the settlement of the Berall v. Verathon patent litigation matter.Investing activities - Cash used in investing activities from continuing operations during the three months ended March 31, 2023 is primarily due to capitalized software expenditures and capital expenditures. Cash used in investing activities from continuing operations during the three months ended March 31, 2022 was due primarily to business acquisitions.Financing activities - Cash used in financing activities from continuing operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily due to dividend payments. Cash used in financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily due to repayments on our unsecured credit facility and dividend payments.Discontinued operations - Cash provided by discontinued operations during the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily due to proceeds received from the sale of TransCore and Zetec.Total debt consisted of the following:
The interest rate on borrowings under the $3,500.0 unsecured credit facility is calculated based upon various recognized indices plus a margin as defined in the credit facility. At March 31, 2023, we had no outstanding borrowings under our unsecured credit facility and $19.1 of outstanding letters of credit.Cash at our foreign subsidiaries at March 31, 2023 increased to $277.9 as compared to $234.0 at December 31, 2022 due primarily to the cash generated at our foreign subsidiaries during the three months ended March 31, 2023. We intend to repatriate substantially all historical and future earnings.We expect existing cash balances, together with cash generated by our operations and amounts available under our credit facility, will be sufficient to fund our operating requirements for the foreseeable future.We were in compliance with all debt covenants related to our unsecured credit facility throughout the three months ended March 31, 2023.Net working capital (total current assets, excluding cash less total current liabilities, excluding debt) was negative $1,025.3 at March 31, 2023 as compared to negative $1,053.7 at December 31, 2022 primarily driven by payments for accrued compensation, reduction in deferred revenue due to the timing of Frontline renewals, and the cash payment related to the settlement of the Berall v. Verathon patent litigation matter which were offset by collections on accounts receivable and an increase in income taxes payable. Total debt, net of deferred finance costs was $6,663.9 at March 31, 2023 as compared to $6,661.7 at December 31, 2022. Our leverage on a continuing operations basis is shown in the following table:
Capital expenditures were $9.8 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $5.4 for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Capitalized software expenditures were $9.9 for the three months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $7.5 for the three months ended March 31, 2022. We expect the aggregate of capital expenditures and capitalized software expenditures for the balance of the year to be comparable to prior years as a percentage of revenues.
At March 31, 2023, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Current geopolitical and economic uncertainties, including the current inflationary environment, supply chain disruptions and labor shortages, could adversely affect our business prospects. An armed conflict (such as the ongoing war in Ukraine), significant terrorist attack, other global conflict, or new or ongoing public health crisis (such as the COVID-19 pandemic)  could cause changes in world economies that would adversely affect us. It is impossible to isolate each of these potential factor’s future effects on current economic conditions or any of our businesses. It is also impossible to predict with any reasonable degree of certainty what or when any additional events may occur that also would similarly disrupt the economy and have an adverse impact on our businesses.We maintain an active acquisition program; however, future acquisitions will be dependent on numerous factors and it is not feasible to reasonably estimate if or when any such acquisitions will occur and what the impact will be on our business, financial condition and results of operations. Such acquisitions may be financed by the use of existing credit agreements, future cash flows from operations, future divestitures, the proceeds from the issuance of new debt or equity securities or any combination of these methods, the terms and availability of which will be subject to market and economic conditions generally.We anticipate that our businesses will generate positive cash flows from operating activities, and that these cash flows will permit the reduction of currently outstanding debt in accordance with the repayment schedule. However, the rate at which we can reduce our debt (and reduce the associated interest expense) will be affected by, among other things, the financing and operating requirements of any new acquisitions, the financial performance of our existing companies and the impact of the aforementioned geopolitical and economic uncertainties and the financial markets generally. None of these factors can be predicted with certainty.