
In January 2023, our Board approved a share repurchase program authorizing the purchase of up to $4.5 billion of our common stock through December 31, 2023. We repurchased $1.25 billion of our common stock in the first quarter of 2023 under our 2023 share repurchase authorization. The following table presents the activity under our common share repurchase program for each of the months in the quarter ended March 31, 2023.
Stock purchases under our common share repurchase program may be made using various types of transactions, including open market purchases, accelerated share repurchases or other transactions off the market, and may be made under Rule 10b5-1 trading programs. The timing and amount of any stock purchases and the type of transaction may not be ratable over the duration of the program, may vary from reporting period to reporting period and will depend on several factors, including our capital position and our financial performance, investment opportunities, market conditions, the nature and timing of implementation of revisions to the Basel III framework and the amount of common stock issued as part of employee compensation programs. The common share repurchase program does not have specific price targets and may be suspended at any time.
A significant portion of the compensation of our executive officers is delivered in the form of deferred equity awards, including deferred stock and performance-based restricted stock unit awards. This compensation design is intended to align executive compensation with the performance experienced by our shareholders. Following the delivery of shares of our common stock under those equity awards, once any applicable service-, time- or performance-based vesting standards have been satisfied, our executive officers from time to time engage in the open-market sale of some of those shares. Our executive officers may also engage from time to time in other transactions involving our securities. Transactions in our securities by our executive officers are required to be made in accordance with our Securities Trading Policy, which, among other things, requires that the transactions be in accordance with applicable U.S. federal securities laws that prohibit trading while in possession of material nonpublic information. Rule 10b5-1 under the Exchange Act provides an affirmative defense that enables prearranged transactions in securities in a manner that avoids concerns about initiating transactions at a future date while possibly in possession of material nonpublic information. Our Securities Trading Policy permits our executive officers to enter into trading plans designed to comply with Rule 10b5-1.The following table describes contracts, instructions or written plans for the sale or purchase of our securities adopted by our executive officers during the first quarter of 2023, each of which is intended to satisfy the affirmative defense conditions of Rule 10b5-1(c), referred to as Rule 10b5-1 trading plans.  As noted above, a significant portion of the compensation of the executives identified in the table is delivered in the form of deferred equity awards, including deferred stock and performance-based restricted stock unit awards.  For example, for the 2022 annual performance year each of these executives received 65% of their total incentive compensation in the form of those awards, consistent with the description of our incentive compensation program in the Compensation Discussion and Analysis section of the proxy statement for our 2023 annual meeting of shareholders (CD&A).  In addition, the executives identified in the table are required to maintain an ownership of State Street common stock with a value equal to at least a multiple of their annual salary (5 times for Mr. Aboaf and Mr. Maiuri and 3 times for Mr. Richards) under our stock ownership guidelines, as further described in our CD&A.  In the event that the executives identified below sell the maximum number of shares contemplated in the table, and no additional shares, upon expiration of their respective 10b5-1 trading plan each executive would still hold at least 70% of the total shares directly or indirectly owned on the date of the adoption of that plan and, assuming consistent stock price levels, also are expected to continue to satisfy our stock ownership guideline requirements.
(1) In each case, a trading plan may also expire on such earlier date as all transactions under the trading plan are completed.During the first quarter of 2023, none of our directors adopted Rule 10b5-1 trading plans and none of our directors or executive officers terminated a Rule 10b5-1 trading plan or adopted or terminated a non-Rule 10b5-1 trading arrangement (as defined in Item 408(c) of Regulation S-K).
Pursuant to the requirement of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned hereunto duly authorized.