
ABOUT STRYKERStryker is one of the world's leading medical technology companies and, together with our customers, we are driven to make healthcare better. We offer innovative products and services in Medical and Surgical, Neurotechnology, Orthopaedics and Spine that help improve patient and healthcare outcomes. Alongside its customers around the world, Stryker impacts more than 130 million patients annually.We segregate our operations into two reportable business segments: (i) MedSurg and Neurotechnology and (ii) Orthopaedics and Spine. MedSurg and Neurotechnology products include surgical equipment and navigation systems (Instruments), endoscopic and communications systems (Endoscopy), patient handling, emergency medical equipment and intensive care disposable products (Medical), minimally invasive products for the treatment of acute ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke (Neurovascular), a comprehensive line of products for traditional brain and open skull based surgical procedures; orthobiologic and biosurgery products, including synthetic bone grafts and vertebral augmentation products (Neuro Cranial). Orthopaedics and Spine products consist primarily of implants used in hip and knee joint replacements and trauma and extremity surgeries, and cervical, thoracolumbar and interbody systems used in spinal injury, deformity and degenerative therapies.Macroeconomic EnvironmentThe global economy is experiencing increased inflationary pressures in part due to global supply chain disruptions, labor shortages and other impacts of the current macroeconomic environment which we anticipate will continue. Higher interest rates and capital costs, higher shipping costs, increased costs of labor, fluctuating foreign currency exchange rates and the military conflict in Russia and Ukraine have created additional economic challenges and uncertainties. These conditions may cause our customers to decrease or delay orders for our products and services, and the higher interest rates may impact deal mix for our capital products.Our operations continue to be adversely impacted by inflationary pressures, labor shortages and supply chain challenges. Supply chain constraints modestly improved during the quarter, however sales growth in certain products continues to be constrained by supply chain challenges and electronic component shortages, especially impacting the capital products in our MedSurg businesses.China Volume-Based Procurement and Import Purchase EvaluationThe government in China has launched regional and national programs for volume-based procurement (VBP) of high-value medical consumables to reduce healthcare costs. Each VBP program has specific requirements to award contracts to the lowest bidders who are able to satisfy the quality and quantity requirements. The successful bidders may be guaranteed sales volume for certain products, while unsuccessful bidders may lose unit sales volume. We have been a winning bidder in certain national and regional VBP programs, including those for joint replacement and trauma products in 2021 and certain neurovascular products in the fourth quarter of 2022 and the first quarter of 2023. The prices required for a successful bid have negatively impacted the commercial operations of our joint replacement, trauma and certain neurovascular products in China.We were unsuccessful in our bids in the VBP program for spine products that took place in the third quarter of 2022 and as a result we are exiting the spine business in China. To date our other businesses have not been significantly impacted, but may be in the future as a result of additional VBP programs. China has also issued national guiding standards for Import Purchase Evaluation which has increased the purchase of locally sourced equipment in China's public hospitals and is impacting our MedSurg business in China. Our business in China represented approximately 1.6% our revenues in the three months 2023.Overview of the Three Months In the three months 2023 we achieved sales growth of 11.8% from 2022. Excluding the impact of acquisitions and divestitures sales grew 13.6% in constant currency. We reported operating income margin of 15.4%, net earnings of $592 and net earnings per diluted share of $1.54. Excluding the impact of certain items, adjusted operating income margin(1) contracted by 70 basis points to 21.1%, with adjusted net earnings(1) of $820 and adjusted net earnings per diluted share(1) of $2.14, an increase of 8.6% from 2022. Recent DevelopmentsOn May 2, 2023 we acquired Cerus Endovascular Limited (Cerus) for $300 in cash and up to $225 in future milestone payments. Cerus designs, develops and manufactures neurovascular products used for the treatment of hemorrhagic stroke. We plan to integrate Cerus into our Neurovascular business within MedSurg and Neurotechnology.(1) Refer to "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for a discussion of non-GAAP financial measures used in this report and a reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
nm - not meaningful
Note: Beginning in the first quarter of 2023, we consolidated Other MedSurg and Neurotechnology into Endoscopy as Other MedSurg and Neurotechnology (primarily Sustainability Solutions) has been fully integrated into our Endoscopy business. Endoscopy includes sales related to Other of $81 and $69 for the three months 2023 and 2022. We have reflected these changes in all historical periods presented.Consolidated Net SalesConsolidated net sales increased 11.8% in the three months 2023 as reported and 14.0% in constant currency, as foreign currency exchange rates negatively impacted net sales by 2.2%. Excluding the 0.4% impact of acquisitions and divestitures, net sales in constant currency increased by 12.9% from increased unit volume and 0.7% due to higher prices. The unit volume increase was due to higher product shipments across most MedSurg and Neurotechnology businesses and all Orthopaedics and Spine businesses.MedSurg and Neurotechnology Net SalesMedSurg and Neurotechnology net sales increased 11.0% in the three months 2023 as reported and 13.1% in constant currency, as foreign currency exchange rates negatively impacted net sales
by 2.1%. Excluding the 0.7% impact of acquisitions and divestitures, net sales in constant currency increased by 10.5% from increased unit volume and 1.9% from higher prices. The unit volume increase was due to higher shipments across most MedSurg and Neurotechnology businesses.
Orthopaedics and Spine net sales increased 12.7% in the three months 2023 as reported and 15.1% in constant currency, as foreign currency exchange rates negatively impacted net sales by 2.4%. Excluding the (0.1)% impact of acquisitions and divestitures, net sales in constant currency increased 16.0% from increased unit volume partially offset by 0.8% from lower prices. The unit volume increase was due to higher shipments across all Orthopaedics and Spine businesses.
Gross profit was $3,016 and $2,734 in the three months 2023 and 2022. The key components of the change were:
Gross profit as a percentage of net sales in the three months 2023 decreased to 63.1% from 64.0% in 2022 due to higher manufacturing and supply chain costs primarily due to higher raw material costs partially offset by higher prices and favorable volume and mix. While mix was not a significant driver of the change in gross profit as a percent of net sales between the three months 2023 and 2022, we generally expect segment mix to have an unfavorable impact for the foreseeable future as we anticipate more rapid sales growth in our lower gross margin MedSurg and Neurotechnology segment than our Orthopaedics and Spine segment.
Research, development and engineering expenses decreased $74 or 17.9% in the three months 2023 and decreased as a percentage of net sales to 7.1% from 9.7% in 2022, primarily due to higher spend in the three months 2022 due to increased costs for product launches and the write-off of certain intangible assets.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $71 or 4.2% in the three months 2023 and decreased as a percentage of net sales to 37.3% from 40.0% in 2022. Expenses in the three months 2022 included a charge of $132 for share-based awards for Vocera employees that vested upon our acquisition. In addition to the impact of this charge, the change in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of net sales in the three months 2023 was affected by the moderating of cost controls previously implemented as well as sales force expansion.
There were no recall charges, net in the three months 2023. Charges of $14 in the three months 2022 were primarily related to the previously disclosed Wright hip products. Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Amortization of intangible assets was $161 and $150 in the three months 2023 and 2022. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Operating income was $735 and $447 in the three months 2023 and 2022. Operating income as a percentage of net sales in the three months 2023 increased to 15.4% from 10.5% in 2022. Refer to the sections above for discussion of the primary drivers of the change. MedSurg and Neurotechnology operating income as a percentage of net sales decreased to 23.3% in the three months 2023 from 26.0% in 2022. Orthopaedics and Spine operating income as a percentage of net sales increase to 28.8% in the three months 2023 from 27.2% in 2022. The key components of the change were:
The decrease in MedSurg and Neurotechnology operating income as a percentage of net sales was primarily impacted by higher manufacturing and supply chain costs due to the effects of inflation on the costs of raw materials and higher selling, general and administrative expenses due to moderating of cost controls previously implemented as well as sales force expansion, partially offset by higher sales prices and unit volumes.The increase in Orthopaedics and Spine operating income as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to higher unit volumes, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses due to moderating of cost controls previously implemented as well as sales force expansion.
Other income (expense), net was ($56) and ($61) in the three months 2023 and 2022.
Our effective tax rates were 12.8% and 16.3% in the three months 2023 and 2022. The effective tax rates for the three months 2023 and 2022 reflect the continued lower effective income tax rates as a result of our European operations and certain discrete tax items.
Net earnings increased to $592 or $1.54 per diluted share in the three months 2023 from $323 or $0.84 per diluted share in 2022. Adjusted net earnings per diluted share(1) was $2.14 in 2023, an increase of 8.6% from 2022.
Non-GAAP Financial MeasuresWe supplement the reporting of our financial information determined under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP) with certain non-GAAP financial measures, including percentage sales growth in constant currency; percentage organic sales growth; adjusted gross profit; adjusted selling, general and administrative expenses; adjusted research, development and engineering expenses; adjusted operating income; adjusted other income (expense), net; adjusted income taxes; adjusted effective income tax rate; adjusted net earnings; and adjusted net earnings per diluted share (Diluted EPS). We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful information to assist investors and shareholders in understanding our financial results and assessing our prospects for future performance. Management believes percentage sales growth in constant currency and the other adjusted measures described above are important indicators of our operations because they exclude items that may not be indicative of or are unrelated to our core operating results and provide a baseline for analyzing trends in our underlying businesses. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures for reviewing the operating results of reportable business segments and analyzing potential future business trends in connection with our budget process and bases certain management incentive compensation on these non-GAAP financial measures. To measure percentage sales growth in constant currency, we remove the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates that affect the comparability and trend of sales. Percentage sales growth in constant currency is calculated by translating current and prior year results at the same foreign currency exchange rate. To measure percentage organic sales growth, we remove the impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, acquisitions and divestitures, which affect the comparability and trend of sales. Percentage organic sales growth is calculated by translating current year and prior year results at the same foreign currency exchange rates excluding the impact of acquisitions and divestitures. To measure earnings performance on a consistent and comparable basis, we exclude certain items that affect the comparability of operating results and the trend of earnings. The income tax effect of each adjustment was determined based on the tax effect of the jurisdiction in which the related pre-tax adjustment was recorded. These adjustments are irregular in timing and may not be indicative of our past and future performance. The following are examples of the types of adjustments that may be included in a period:1.Acquisition and integration-related costs. Costs related to integrating recently acquired businesses (e.g., costs associated with the termination of sales relationships, employee retention and workforce reductions, manufacturing integration costs and other integration-related activities), changes in the fair value of contingent consideration, amortization of inventory stepped-up to fair value and specific costs (e.g., deal costs) related to the consummation of the acquisition process and legal entity rationalization.2.Amortization of purchased intangible assets. Periodic amortization expense related to purchased intangible assets.3.Structural optimization and other special charges. Costs associated with employee retention and workforce reductions, the closure or transfer of manufacturing and other facilities (e.g., site closure costs, contract termination costs and redundant employee costs during the work transfers), product line exits (primarily inventory, long-lived asset and specifically-identified intangible asset write-offs), certain long-lived and intangible asset write-offs and impairments and other charges.4.Medical device regulations. Costs specific to updating our quality system, product labeling, asset write-offs and product remanufacturing to comply with the new medical device reporting regulations and other requirements of the European Union.5.Recall-related matters. Changes in our best estimate of the minimum of the range of probable loss to resolve the Rejuvenate, LFIT V40, Wright legacy hip products and other product recalls.6.Regulatory and legal matters. Changes in our best estimate of the minimum of the range of probable loss to resolve certain regulatory or other legal matters and the amount of favorable awards from settlements.7.Tax matters. Impact of accounting for certain significant and discrete tax items.Because non-GAAP financial measures are not standardized, it may not be possible to compare these financial measures with other companies' non-GAAP financial measures having the same or similar names. These adjusted financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for reported sales growth, gross profit, selling, general and administrative expenses, research, development and engineering expenses, operating income, other income (expense), net, income taxes, effective income tax rate, net earnings and net earnings per diluted share, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures are an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations when viewed with our GAAP results and the reconciliations to corresponding GAAP financial measures at the end of the discussion of Consolidated Results of Operations below. We strongly encourage investors and shareholders to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely on any single financial measure.The weighted-average diluted shares outstanding used in the calculation of non-GAAP net earnings per diluted share are the same as those used in the calculation of reported net earnings per diluted share for the respective period.
Cash provided by operating activities was $445 and $203 in the three months 2023 and 2022. The increase was primarily due to net earnings and higher accounts receivable collections.
Cash used in investing activities was $132 and $2,682 in the three months 2023 and 2022. The three months 2022 included cash paid for the Vocera acquisition. Refer to Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Financing ActivitiesCash (used in) provided by financing activities was ($481) and $993 in the three months 2023 and 2022. Cash used in 2023 was primarily driven by dividend payments of $284 and a repayment of $100 on the term loan used to fund the acquisition of Vocera. Cash provided by financing activities in 2022 was primarily due to the issuance of the $1,500 term loan used to fund the acquisition of Vocera, partially offset by dividend payments of $262 and net repayments of $170 on short-term borrowings. We did not repurchase any shares in the three months 2023 and 2022. LiquidityCash, cash equivalents and marketable securities were $1,757 and $1,928 on March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. Current assets exceeded current liabilities by $4,289 and $3,972 on March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. We anticipate being
able to support our short-term liquidity and operating needs from a variety of sources including cash from operations, commercial paper and existing credit lines.We have raised funds in the capital markets and have accessed the credit markets in the past and may continue to do so from time-to-time. We continue to have strong investment-grade short-term and long-term debt ratings that we believe should enable us to refinance our debt as needed. Our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held in locations outside the United States was approximately 31% on March 31, 2023 compared to 36% on December 31, 2022. Critical Accounting Policies and EstimatesThere were no changes to our critical accounting policies and estimates from those disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2022, except as follows:We test goodwill annually for impairment at October 31 or whenever events or circumstances indicate that goodwill may be impaired. When it is unlikely that goodwill of a reporting unit is impaired, we perform a qualitative assessment that may be periodically supplemented with a corroborative quantitative analysis. The supplemental analysis supporting our 2021 annual goodwill impairment tests was performed using a market approach that utilizes trading multiples derived from a peer set of similar companies. The results of that supplemental analysis indicated that, at October 31, 2021, the implied fair values of our reporting units exceeded their respective carrying amounts by approximately 50% for our Spine reporting unit and at least 100% for all other reporting units.When necessary, we perform a quantitative impairment test and determine the fair value of a reporting unit using an income approach and we corroborate our concluded value under the income approach using a market approach that utilizes trading multiples derived from a peer set of similar companies. The income approach calculates the present value of estimated future cash flows and requires certain assumptions and estimates to be made regarding market conditions and our future profitability. Considerable management judgment is necessary to evaluate the impact of operating and macroeconomic changes and to estimate future cash flows used to measure fair value. Assumptions used in our impairment evaluations, such as forecasted growth rates and cost of capital, are consistent with internal business plans. We believe such assumptions and estimates are also comparable to those that would be used by other marketplace participants.During 2022 our Spine reporting unit’s operating performance was affected by several factors, including a slower than anticipated recovery of surgery volumes as we emerged from the COVID-19 pandemic, rising costs and our competitive environment. Consequently, for the year ended December 31, 2022 revenues, gross margin and operating income were 3%, 4% and 33% below budgeted amounts. For the annual impairment test of our Spine reporting unit at October 31, 2022, we performed a quantitative impairment test and recognized a goodwill impairment charge of $216. The fair value of our Spine reporting unit was determined using a discounted cash flow analysis, which is a form of the income approach. Significant inputs to the analysis included assumptions for future revenue growth, operating margin and the rate used to discount the estimated future cash flows to their present value, based on the reporting unit’s estimated weighted average cost of capital. The impairment charge for our Spine reporting unit was also significantly affected by the discount rate, which was impacted by central banks raising interest rates during 2022 and increased
risk due to macroeconomic conditions. Our assumptions for revenue growth and operating margin considered the operating factors described above, including surgery volumes, increased costs and our competitive environment.The assumptions used in the discounted cash flow analysis are subject to inherent uncertainties and subjectivity. The use of different assumptions, estimates or judgments with respect to the estimation of future cash flows and the determination of the discount rate used to reduce such estimated future cash flows to their net present value could materially change any related impairment charge. We believe our estimates are appropriate based upon current and future market conditions and the best information available at the impairment assessment date. However, future impairment charges could be required if we do not achieve our cash flow, revenue and profitability projections or if there is an increase in the weighted average cost of capital. Changes in our estimates of the discount rate, long-term revenue growth and long-term operating margin would result in additional goodwill impairment charges as follows:
For our other reporting units we performed qualitative assessments and concluded it was more likely than not that the fair values of those reporting units exceeded their respective carrying amounts. No impairment was identified for those reporting units in 2022 and we did not identify any factors at October 31, 2022 that would lead us to believe that those reporting units are at risk of a goodwill impairment. Future changes in the judgments, assumptions and estimates that are used in our impairment testing for goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, including discount rates and cash flow projections, could result in significantly different estimates of the fair values. A significant reduction in the estimated fair values could result in impairment charges that could materially affect our results of operations.
Refer to Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information.
We do not have guarantees or other off-balance sheet financing arrangements, including variable interest entities, of a magnitude that we believe could have a material impact on our financial condition or liquidity.
We are involved in various ongoing proceedings, legal actions and claims arising in the normal course of our business, including proceedings related to product, labor, intellectual property and other matters. Refer to Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
This report contains statements that are not historical facts and are considered "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements are based on current projections about operations, industry conditions, financial condition and liquidity. Words that identify forward-looking statements include, without limitation, words such as "may," "could," "will," "should," "possible," "plan," "predict," "forecast," "potential," "anticipate," "estimate," "expect," "project," "intend," "believe," "may impact," "on track," "goal," "strategy" and words and terms of similar substance used in connection with any discussion of future operating or financial performance, an acquisition or our businesses. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward-looking statements. Those statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions that are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual results could differ materially and adversely from these forward-looking statements, historical experience or our present expectations. Some important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from our expectations in any forward-looking statements include the risks discussed in Item 1A. "Risk Factors" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2022. This Form 10-Q should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for 2022. We disclaim any intention or obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statement to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which those expectations may be based, or that affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements.