
The following management discussion and analysis (“MD&A”) provides information that we believe is useful in understanding our operating results, cash flows and financial condition. We provide quantitative information about the material sales drivers including the effect of acquisitions and changes in foreign currency at the corporate and segment level. We also provide quantitative information about discrete tax items and other significant factors we believe are useful for understanding our results. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with both the unaudited condensed consolidated financial information and related notes included in this Form 10-Q, and Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 2022. This discussion contains various “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and also contains various “Forward-Looking Statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We refer readers to the statements entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” and “Forward-Looking Information and Cautionary Statements” located at the end of Item 2 of this report.
Bio-Techne and its subsidiaries, collectively doing business as Bio-Techne Corporation (Bio-Techne, we, our, us or the Company) develop, manufacture and sell biotechnology reagents, instruments and services for the research and clinical diagnostic markets worldwide. We use our deep product portfolio and application expertise to develop and sell integral components of scientific investigations into biological processes and molecular diagnostics, revealing the nature, diagnosis, etiology and progression of specific diseases. Our products aid in drug discovery efforts and provide the means for accurate clinical tests and diagnoses.Consistent with the prior year, we have operated with two segments – our Protein Sciences segment and our Diagnostics and Genomics segment – during the third quarter of fiscal 2023. Our Protein Sciences segment is a leading developer and manufacturer of high-quality purified proteins and reagent solutions, most notably cytokines and growth factors, antibodies, immunoassays, biologically active small molecule compounds, tissue culture reagents and cell therapy workflow technologies. This segment also includes protein analysis solutions that offer researchers efficient and streamlined options for automated western blot, multiplexed ELISA workflow and protein purity, identify and charge analysis. Our Diagnostics and Genomics segment develops and manufactures diagnostic products, including FDA-regulated controls, calibrators, blood gas and clinical chemistry controls and other reagents for OEM and clinical customers, as well as a portfolio of clinical molecular diagnostic oncology assays, including the ExoDx®Prostate (IntelliScore) test (EPI) for prostate cancer diagnosis. This segment also manufactures and sells advanced tissue-based in-situ hybridization assays (ISH) for research and clinical use.
A key component of the Company's strategy is to augment internal growth of existing businesses with complementary acquisitions. On July 1, 2022, the Company completed the acquisition of Namocell, Inc. for $101.2 million, net of cash acquired, plus contingent consideration of up to $25 million upon the achievement of certain future milestones. The Namocell acquisition adds a leading provider of single cell sorting and dispensing platforms that are gentle to cells and therefore preserve cell viability and integrity. Refer to Note 4 for additional disclosure regarding the Company's recent acquisitions.
Consolidated net sales increased 1% and 2% for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, compared to the same prior year periods. Organic growth for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 was 3% compared to the prior year with foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 2% and acquisitions having an immaterial impact. Organic growth for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was 4% compared to the prior year same period with acquisitions contributing 1% to revenue growth and foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 3%.Consolidated net earnings attributable to Bio-Techne increased to $70.2 million for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $60.7 million for the quarter ended March 31, 2022. The increase in net earnings attributable to Bio-Techne is primarily due to a non-recurring loss of approximately $17.2 million on our ChemoCentryx investment in the prior year. Consolidated net earnings attributable to Bio-Techne decreased to $209.8 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 as compared to $210.5 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease in net earnings attributable to Bio-Techne for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 is due to
Table of Contentsunfavorable foreign currency exchange and the Namocell acquisition, partially offset by non-recurring gains on the sale of our ChemoCentryx investment and sale of our partially-owned consolidated subsidiary in the first fiscal quarter of 2023. Business Strategy UpdateEnvironmentalThe Company’s key business strategies for long-term growth and profitability continue to be geographic expansion, core product innovation, acquisitions and talent retention and development. As a Company, we are integrating consideration of greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental variables into our key business strategies. The Company also strives to innovate and improve all aspects of Bio-Techne’s operations, including reducing the environmental impacts of our manufacturing operations. As described in our Corporate Sustainability Report, among other initiatives, the Company is currently focused on establishing a baseline for emissions to develop appropriate emission reduction targets, as well as reducing our environmental footprint through changes in packaging and shipping materials.In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company took additional steps to monitor and strengthen our supply chain to maintain an uninterrupted supply of our critical products and services. The Company has maintained these procedures while incorporating additional considerations regarding potential adverse weather events associated with climate change.The financial impact of potential environmental regulations pertaining to carbon emissions or the integration of climate change impacts into our core business strategies are not expected to materially alter the Company’s near-term financial results. Additionally, the Company has established a cross-functional internal council and working group to monitor and report on its sustainability efforts, including those related to measuring and mitigating greenhouse gas emissions.DigitalIn driving our key business strategies, the Company utilizes digital networks and systems for data transmission, transaction processing, and storing of electronic information. As disclosed in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of the Company’s Form 10-K, increased cybersecurity attack activity poses a risk for our business. In response to this risk, the Company actively completes system patching and required maintenance, performs internal and third-party employee training, monitors network and system activity, and completes data backups for our systems. However, even with the Company’s procedures performed, our digital networks and systems are still potentially vulnerable to cyberattacks.The financial impact of our cybersecurity initiatives and activities are ongoing and not expected to have a material impact on our financial results. However, the impact on our business operations and financial results from a material cyber breach would be unknown and dependent on the nature of the breach.Net SalesConsolidated net sales for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were $294.1 million and $835.4 million, respectively, an increase of 1% and 2% from the same prior year periods. Organic growth for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 was 3% compared to the prior year with foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 2% and acquisitions having an immaterial impact. Organic growth for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was 4% compared to the prior year same period with acquisitions contributing 1% to revenue growth and foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 3%. Organic growth for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by consumable growth in our Protein Sciences segment, which was partially offset by non-recurring revenue in our Diagnostics and Genomics segment in the prior year related to the ExoTru kidney transplant rejection agreement. Organic growth for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 is primarily driven by consumables and service revenue growth in the Americas. ​25
Consolidated gross margins for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were 68.7% and 67.6% respectively, compared to 69.4% and 68.0% for the same prior year periods. Under purchase accounting, inventory is valued at fair value less expected selling and marketing costs, resulting in reduced margins in future periods as the inventory is sold. Excluding the impact of costs recognized upon the sale of acquired inventory, stock compensation expense, amortization of intangibles, and impact of partially-owned consolidated subsidiaries, adjusted gross margins for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were 72.6% and 71.8%, respectively compared to 73.2% and 72.3% for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2022, respectively. Both consolidated gross margins and non-GAAP adjusted gross margins for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were impacted by changes in foreign currency exchange rates compared to the same prior year periods.A reconciliation of the reported consolidated gross margin percentages, adjusted for acquired inventory sold, intangible amortization, stock compensation expense, and impact of partially-owned consolidated subsidiaries included in cost of sales, is as follows:
(1)Includes the quarterly results of the partially-owned consolidated subsidiary prior to the sale of this partially-owned consolidated subsidiary to a third party in the first fiscal quarter of 2023.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 11% to $99.2 million and increased 6% to $291.6 million for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, from the same prior year periods. The increase in expense for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 was primarily due to the Namocell acquisition, higher inflation, and timing of strategic growth investments. The increase in expense for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily due to the Namocell acquisition higher inflation, and timing of strategic growth investments, which was partially offset by the non-recurring Eminence impairment in the comparable prior year period as described in Note 1.
Research and development expenses increased 4% to $22.7 million and increased 8% to $69.1 million for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, from the same prior year periods. The increase in expense was due to the Namocell acquisition, higher inflation, and the timing of strategic growth investments.
Protein Sciences’ net sales for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were $218.9 million and $622.7 million, respectively, with results increasing 3% and 1%, respectively compared to the same respective prior year periods. Organic growth for the segment was 5% for the quarter ended March 31, 2023, with foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 2% and acquisitions having an immaterial impact. Organic growth for the segment was 3% for the nine months ended March 31, 2023, with foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 2% and acquisitions having an immaterial impact. Segment growth was driven by growth in consumable revenue to BioPharma customers within the Americas and Europe.The operating margin was 45.1% and 44.1% for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, compared to 45.4% and 45.5% in both comparative prior year periods. The segment’s operating margin compared to the prior year was negatively impacted by unfavorable foreign currency exchange, higher inflation, and the Namocell acquisition.
Diagnostics and Genomics' net sales for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 were $75.7 million and $213.6 million, respectively, with reduced net sales of 3% and reported growth of 5% compared to the same respective prior year periods. Organic revenue for the segment for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 reduced by 2% from the prior year, with foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 1%. Segment results were driven by a non-recurring milestone payment for ExoTru in the comparative period, which was partially offset by an increase in service revenue related to our ExoDx Prostate test and consumable revenue from our Spatial Biology platform.Organic growth for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 was 7% compared to the prior year, with foreign currency exchange having an unfavorable impact of 2%. Segment results were driven by growth in the spatial biology consumables and service revenue related to our ExoDx Prostate test, which were partially offset by a non-recurring milestone payment for ExoTru in the comparative period.  The operating margin for the segment was 15.2% and 13.3% for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, compared to 25.0% and 18.6% in both comparative prior year periods. The segment’s operating margin was negatively impacted by the non-recurring payment for ExoTru in the comparable period, higher inflation, and additional investments made in the business to support future growth.
Income taxes were at an effective rate of 12.4% and 16.1% of consolidated earnings for the quarter and nine month period ended March 31, 2023, respectively, compared to 12.5% and 9.5% for the same respective prior year periods. The change in the Company’s tax rate for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 was driven by the composition and amount of net income across periods and the impact of discrete tax benefits of $5.7 million and $8.9 million, respectively, compared to prior year discrete tax benefits of $6.3 million and $31.6 million as further discussed in Note 12.
The forecasted tax rate as of the third fiscal quarter of 2023 before discrete items is 20.6% compared to the prior year forecasted tax rate before discrete items of 23.8%. Excluding the impact of discrete items, the Company expects the consolidated income tax rate for the remainder of fiscal 2023 to range from 20% to 24%.
Non-GAAP adjusted consolidated net earnings are as follows (in thousands):
(1)Includes the quarterly results of the partially-owned consolidated subsidiary prior to the sale of this partially-owned consolidated subsidiary to a third party.(2) All references made to share or per share amounts in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations have been retroactively adjusted to reflect the effects of the stock split. See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 1 of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for additional information.Depending on the nature of discrete tax items, our reported tax rate may not be consistent on a period to period basis. The Company independently calculates a non-GAAP adjusted tax rate considering the impact of discrete items and jurisdictional mix of the identified
non-GAAP adjustments. The following table summarizes the reported GAAP tax rate and the effective non-GAAP adjusted tax rate for the quarter and nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022.
The difference between the reported GAAP tax rate and non-GAAP tax rate applied to the identified non-GAAP adjustments for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 is primarily a result of discrete tax items, including the tax benefit of stock option exercises.
Cash and cash equivalents and available-for-sale investments were $157.2 million as of March 31, 2023, compared to $247.0 million as of June 30, 2022. Included in the available-for-sale-investments was the fair value of the Company’s investment in exchange traded investment grade bond funds, which was $23.9 million as of March 31, 2023 and $23.9 million as of June 30, 2022. During the first fiscal quarter, the Company sold its remaining shares of its investment in CCXI. As of June 30, 2022, the fair value of the Company’s investment in CCXI was $36.0 million.The Company has a line-of-credit governed by a Credit Agreement dated August 31, 2022 that will mature on August 1, 2027. This Credit Agreement amended and restated the Company’s previous credit agreement that was entered into on August 1, 2018 and would have matured on August 1, 2023. See Note 6 to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of the Credit Agreement. The Company has remaining potential contingent consideration payments of up to $100 million  related to the Asuragen and Namocell acquisitions as of March 31, 2023. The fair value of the remaining payments is $5.3 million as of March 31, 2023.During fiscal year 2022, the Company paid $25 million to enter into a two-part forward contract which requires the Company to purchase the full equity interest in Wilson Wolf if certain annual revenue or EBITDA thresholds are met. During the third fiscal quarter of 2023, Wilson Wolf met the required threshold for the first part of the forward contract. A payment of $232 million was made during the third fiscal quarter of 2023. The Company is currently forecasting the second option payment of approximately $1 billion plus potential contingent consideration to occur between fiscal 2026 and fiscal 2028.Management of the Company expects to be able to meet its cash and working capital requirements for operations, facility expansion, capital additions, and cash dividends for the foreseeable future, and at least the next 12 months, through currently available cash, cash generated from operations, and remaining credit available on its existing revolving line of credit.
The Company generated cash of $171.0 million from operating activities in the nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to $222.6  million in the nine months ended March 31, 2022. The decrease from the prior year was primarily due to a reduction of operating income from the prior year combined with unfavorable timing of payments on certain operating liabilities and increases in certain operating assets resulting from the additional steps taken to strengthen our supply chain as discussed within our Business Strategy Update section.
Table of ContentsCash Flows From Investing ActivitiesWe continue to make investments in our business, including capital expenditures.Capital expenditures for fixed assets for the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022 were $27.4 million and $31.3 million, respectively. Capital expenditures for the remainder of fiscal 2023 are expected to be approximately $14 million. Capital expenditures are expected to be financed through currently available funds and cash generated from operating activities. Expected additions in fiscal 2023 are related to increasing capacity to meet expected sales growth across the Company.During the nine months ended March 31, 2023, the Company acquired Namocell, Inc for $101.2 million, net of cash acquired. There were no acquisitions in the comparative prior year period.During the first fiscal quarter of 2023, the Company sold its remaining shares in Eminence, its partially-owned consolidated subsidiary, for $17.8 million. There were no sales of businesses in the comparative prior year period.In the first fiscal quarter of 2023, the Company sold its remaining shares in its investment in CCXI for $73.2 million. There were no comparable activities in the comparative prior year period.During the nine months ended March 31, 2022, the Company paid $25 million to enter into a two-part forward contract which requires the Company to purchase the full equity interest in Wilson Wolf if certain annual revenue or EBITDA thresholds are met. Wilson Wolf achieved the first threshold during the third quarter of fiscal 2023. The Company made its first option payment of $232 million during the nine months ended March 31, 2023. The second option payment of approximately $1 billion plus potential contingent consideration is forecasted to occur between fiscal 2026 and fiscal 2028. There were no comparable activities in the comparative prior year period.Cash Flows From Financing ActivitiesDuring the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, the Company paid cash dividends of $37.7 million and $37.6 million, respectively, to all common shareholders. On May 3, 2023, the Company announced the payment of a $0.08 per share cash dividend, or approximately $12.6 million, will be payable May 26, 2023,  to all common shareholders of record on May 15, 2023.Cash of $21.4 million and $68.4 million was received during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, respectively, from the exercise of stock options.During the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, the Company made payments of $505.7 million and $172.4 million, respectively, on its long-term debt balance.During the nine months ended March 31, 2023, and March 31, 2022, the Company borrowed $619.7 million and $90.0 million, respectively, of its line-of-credit facility. During the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, the Company repurchased $19.6 million and $102.1 million of common stock, respectively. During the nine months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, the Company paid $28.9 million and $23.4 million related to taxes on restricted stock units and stock options exercised through net share settlements classified as financing activities.​The increase in other financing activity during the nine months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the nine months ended March 31, 2022 is primarily related to fees for the amended Credit Agreement that occurred in the first fiscal quarter.  CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIESThe Company's significant accounting policies are discussed in the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal 2022 and are incorporated herein by reference. The application of certain of these policies requires judgments and estimates that can affect the results of operations and financial position of the Company. Judgments and estimates are used for, but not limited to, valuation of available-for-sale investments, inventory valuation and allowances, valuation of intangible assets and goodwill and valuation of investments in unconsolidated entities. There have been no significant changes in estimates in the quarter or nine months ended March 31, 2023 that would require disclosure nor have there been any changes to the Company's policies.30Table of Contents​NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURESThis Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, including “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation” in Item 2, contains financial measures that have not been calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. (GAAP). These non-GAAP measures include:●Organic growth●Adjusted gross margin●Adjusted operating margin●Adjusted net earnings●Adjusted effective tax rateWe provide these measures as additional information regarding our operating results. We use these non-GAAP measures internally to evaluate our performance and in making financial and operational decisions, including with respect to incentive compensation. We believe that our presentation of these measures provides investors with greater transparency with respect to our results of operations and that these measures are useful for period-to-period comparison of results.Our non-GAAP financial measure of organic growth represents revenue growth excluding revenue from acquisitions within the preceding 12 months, the impact of foreign currency, as well as the impact of partially-owned consolidated subsidiaries. Excluding these measures provides more useful period-to-period comparison of revenue results as it excludes the impact of foreign currency exchange rates, which can vary significantly from period to period, and revenue from acquisitions that would not be included in the comparable prior period. Revenues from partially-owned subsidiaries consolidated in our financial statements are also excluded from our organic revenue calculation, as those revenues are not fully attributable to the Company. There was no revenue from partially-owned consolidated subsidiaries for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 due to the sale of Changzhou Eminence Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Eminence) in the first quarter of fiscal 2023. Revenue from partially-owned consolidated subsidiaries was $2.0 million for the nine months ended March 31, 2023.Our non-GAAP financial measures for adjusted gross margin, adjusted operating margin, and adjusted net earnings, in total and on a per share basis, exclude stock-based compensation, the costs recognized upon the sale of acquired inventory, amortization of acquisition intangibles, acquisition related expenses inclusive of the changes in fair value of contingent consideration, and other non-recurring items including non-recurring costs, goodwill and long-lived asset impairments, and gains. Stock-based compensation is excluded from non-GAAP adjusted net earnings because of the nature of this charge, specifically the varying available valuation methodologies, subjection assumptions, variety of award types, and unpredictability of amount and timing of employer related tax obligations. The Company excludes amortization of purchased intangible assets, purchase accounting adjustments, including costs recognized upon the sale of acquired inventory and acquisition-related expenses inclusive of the changes in fair value contingent consideration, and other non-recurring items including gains or losses on legal settlements, goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges, and one-time assessments from this measure because they occur as a result of specific events, and are not reflective of our internal investments, the costs of developing, producing, supporting and selling our products, and the other ongoing costs to support our operating structure. Additionally, these amounts can vary significantly from period to period based on current activity. The Company also excludes revenue and expense attributable to partially-owned consolidated subsidiaries in the calculation of our non-GAAP financial measures as the revenues and expenses are not fully attributable to the Company.The Company’s non-GAAP adjusted operating margin and adjusted net earnings, in total and on a per share basis, also excludes stock-based compensation expense, which is inclusive of the employer portion of payroll taxes on those stock awards, restructuring, impairments of equity method investments, gain and losses from investments, and certain adjustments to income tax expense. Impairments of equity investments are excluded as they are not part of our day-to-day operating decisions. Additionally, gains and losses from other investments that are either isolated or cannot be expected to occur again with any predictability are excluded. Costs related to restructuring activities, including reducing overhead and consolidating facilities, are excluded because we believe they are not indicative of our normal operating costs. The Company independently calculates a non-GAAP adjusted tax rate to be applied to the identified non-GAAP adjustments considering the impact of discrete items on these adjustments and the jurisdictional mix of the adjustments. In addition, the tax impact of other discrete and non-recurring charges which impact our 31Table of Contentsreported GAAP tax rate are adjusted from net earnings. We believe these tax items can significantly affect the period-over-period assessment of operating results and not necessarily reflect costs and/or income associated with historical trends and future results.The Company periodically reassesses the components of our non-GAAP adjustments for changes in how we evaluate our performance, changes in how we make financial and operational decisions, and considers the use of these measures by our competitors and peers to ensure the adjustments are still relevant and meaningful.Readers are encouraged to review the reconciliations of the adjusted financial measures used in management's discussion and analysis of the financial condition of the Company to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures provided within the Company's consolidated financial statements.FORWARD LOOKING INFORMATION AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTSThis quarterly report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include those regarding the Company's expectations as to the effect of changes to accounting policies, the amount of capital expenditures for the remainder of the fiscal year, the source of funding for capital expenditure requirements, the sufficiency of currently available funds for meeting the Company's needs, the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, and expectations regarding gross margin fluctuations, increasing research and development expenses, increasing selling, general and administrative expenses and income tax rates. These statements involve risks and uncertainties that may affect the actual results of operations. The following important factors, among others, have affected and, in the future, could affect the Company's actual results: integration of newly acquired businesses, the introduction and acceptance of new products, general national and international economic, political, regulatory, and other conditions, increased competition, the reliance on internal manufacturing and related operations, supply chain challenges, the impact of currency exchange rate fluctuations, the recruitment and retention of qualified personnel, the impact of governmental regulation, maintenance of intellectual property rights, credit risk and fluctuation in the market value of the Company's investment portfolio, and unseen delays and expenses related to facility construction and improvements. For additional information concerning such factors, see the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for fiscal 2022 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and Part II. Item 1A below.​32