
We are the leading off-price apparel and home fashions retailer in the U.S. and worldwide. Our mission is to deliver great value to our customers every day. We do this by selling a rapidly changing assortment of apparel, home fashions and other merchandise at prices generally 20% to 60% below full-price retailers’ (including department, specialty and major online retailers) regular prices on comparable merchandise, every day through our stores and five distinctive branded e-commerce sites. We operate over 4,800 stores through our four main segments: in the U.S., Marmaxx (which operates T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, tjmaxx.com and marshalls.com) and HomeGoods (which operates HomeGoods, Homesense and homegoods.com); TJX Canada (which operates Winners, HomeSense and Marshalls in Canada); and TJX International (which operates T.K. Maxx, Homesense and tkmaxx.com in Europe, and T.K. Maxx in Australia). In addition to our four main segments, Sierra operates retail stores and sierra.com in the U.S. The results of Sierra are included in the Marmaxx segment.
As an overview of our financial performance, results for the quarter ended April 29, 2023 include the following:–Net sales increased 3% to $11.8 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 versus last year’s first quarter sales of $11.4 billion. As of April 29, 2023, the number of stores in operation increased 3% and selling square footage increased 3% compared to the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2023.–Consolidated comp store sales increased 3% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024. See Net Sales below for definition of comp store sales.–Diluted earnings per share for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 were $0.76 versus $0.49 in the first quarter of fiscal 2023. The first quarter of fiscal 2023 included a $218 million impairment on our equity investment in Familia, or a $0.19 negative impact on earnings per share.–Pre-tax profit margin (the ratio of pre-tax income to net sales) for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was 10.3%, a 2.8 percentage point increase compared with 7.5% in the first quarter of fiscal 2023, which included a negative 1.9 percentage point impact from the impairment on our equity investment in Familia.–Our cost of sales, including buying and occupancy costs, ratio for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was 71.1%, a 1.0 percentage point decrease compared with 72.1% in the first quarter of fiscal 2023.–Our selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expense ratio for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was 19.0%, a 0.6  percentage point increase compared with 18.4% in the first quarter of fiscal 2023.–Our consolidated average per store inventories, including inventory on hand at our distribution centers (which excludes inventory in transit) and excluding our e-commerce sites and Sierra stores, were down 5% on a reported basis and down 4% on a constant currency basis at the end of the first quarter of fiscal 2024.–During the first quarter of fiscal 2024, we returned over $0.8 billion to our shareholders through share repurchases and dividends.
The following table sets forth our consolidated operating results as a percentage of net sales:
*Figures may not foot due to rounding.
Net sales for the quarter ended April 29, 2023 totaled $11.8 billion, a 3% increase versus first quarter fiscal 2023 net sales of $11.4 billion. The increase reflects a 3% increase in comp store sales and a 1% increase from non-comp store sales, partially offset by a 1% negative impact from foreign currency exchange rates. Net sales from our e-commerce sites combined amounted to less than 2% of total sales for each of the first quarters of fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023.We have returned to our historical definition of comparable store sales (as defined below). While stores in the U.S. were open for all of fiscal 2022, a significant number of stores in TJX Canada and TJX International experienced COVID-related temporary store closures and government-mandated shopping restrictions during fiscal 2022. Therefore, in fiscal 2023, we could not measure year-over-year comparable store sales with fiscal 2022 in these geographies in a meaningful way. As a result, the comparable stores included in the fiscal 2023 measure consisted of U.S. stores only, which we refer to as U.S. comparable store sales (“U.S. comp store sales”), and are calculated against sales for the comparable period in fiscal 2022.Comp store sales increased 3% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024. U.S. comp store sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2023 were flat. Comp store sales reflect an increase in customer traffic, partially offset by a decrease in average basket. Within average basket, a decline in units was partially offset by an increase in average ticket. Strong apparel comp sales outperformed a decline in home fashions sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2024.As of April 29, 2023, our store count increased 3% and selling square footage increased 3% compared to the end of the first quarter last year.
We define comparable store sales, or comp store sales, to be sales of stores that have been in operation for all or a portion of two consecutive fiscal years, or, in other words, stores that are starting their third fiscal year of operation. We calculate comp store sales on a 52-week basis by comparing the current and prior year weekly periods that are most closely aligned. Relocated stores and stores that have changed in size are generally classified in the same way as the original store, and we believe that the impact of these stores on the consolidated comp percentage is immaterial.Sales excluded from comp store sales (“non-comp store sales”) consist of sales from:–New stores - stores that have not yet met the comp store sales criteria, which represents a substantial majority of non-comp store sales–Stores that are closed permanently or for an extended period of time–Sales from our e-commerce sitesWe determine which stores are included in the comp store sales calculation at the beginning of a fiscal year and the classification remains constant throughout that year unless a store is closed permanently or for an extended period during that fiscal year.Comp store sales of our foreign segments are calculated by translating the current year’s comp store sales using the prior year’s exchange rates. This removes the effect of changes in currency exchange rates, which we believe is a more accurate measure of segment operating performance.Comp store sales may be referred to as “same store” sales by other retail companies. The method for calculating comp store sales varies across the retail industry; therefore, our measure of comp store sales may not be comparable to that of other retail companies.We define customer traffic to be the number of transactions in stores and average ticket to be the average retail price of the units sold. We define average transaction or average basket to be the average dollar value of transactions.
Our operating results are affected by foreign currency exchange rates as a result of changes in the value of the U.S. dollar or a division’s local currency in relation to other currencies. We specifically refer to “foreign currency” as the impact of translational foreign currency exchange and mark-to-market of inventory derivatives, as described in detail below. This does not include the impact foreign currency exchange rates can have on various transactions that are denominated in a currency other than an operating division's local currency, which is referred to as “transactional foreign exchange,” and also described below.
In our consolidated financial statements, we translate the operations of TJX Canada and TJX International from local currencies into U.S. dollars using currency rates in effect at different points in time. Significant changes in foreign exchange rates between comparable prior periods can result in meaningful variations in assets, liabilities, net sales, net income and earnings per share growth as well as the net sales and operating results of these segments. Currency translation generally does not affect operating margins, or affects them only slightly, as sales and expenses of the foreign operations are translated at approximately the same rates within a given period.
We routinely enter into inventory-related hedging instruments to mitigate the impact on earnings of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on merchandise purchases denominated in currencies other than the local currencies of our divisions, principally TJX Canada and TJX International. As we have not elected “hedge accounting” for these instruments, as defined by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we record a mark-to-market gain or loss on the derivative instruments in our results of operations at the end of each reporting period. In subsequent periods, the income statement impact of the mark-to-market adjustment is effectively offset when the inventory being hedged is received and paid for. While these effects occur every reporting period, they are of much greater magnitude when there are sudden and significant changes in currency exchange rates during a short period of time. The mark-to-market adjustment on these derivatives does not affect net sales, but it does affect the cost of sales, operating margins and earnings we report.
When discussing the impact on our results of the effect of foreign currency exchange rates on certain transactions, we refer to it as “transactional foreign exchange”. This primarily includes the impact that foreign currency exchange rates may have on the year-over-year comparison of merchandise margin as well as “foreign currency gains and losses” on transactions that are denominated in a currency other than the operating division's local currency. These two items can impact segment margin comparison of our foreign divisions, and we have highlighted them when they are meaningful to understanding operating trends.
Cost of sales, including buying and occupancy costs, as a percentage of net sales was 71.1% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, a decrease of 1 percentage point over 72.1% for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.The decrease in the cost of sales ratio, including buying and occupancy costs, for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was primarily attributable to higher merchandise margin, partially offset by the unfavorable impact on the mark-to-market adjustment on fuel and inventory hedges. Merchandise margin reflects favorable freight costs and higher markon, partially offset by higher shrink accrual rates in the current year.
SG&A expenses, as a percentage of net sales, was 19.0% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, an increase of 0.6 percentage points over 18.4% for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.The increase in the SG&A ratio for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was driven by higher administrative costs, store management and store associate payroll.
During fiscal 2023, we announced and completed the divestiture of our minority investment in Familia. As a result, we recorded an impairment charge of $218 million in the first quarter of fiscal 2023 representing the entire carrying value of the investment. Additionally, we realized a $54 million tax benefit when we completed the divestiture of this investment during the third quarter of fiscal 2023.
The components of interest (income) expense, net are summarized below:
Net interest (income) expense decreased for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to the same period in fiscal 2023 due to an increase in interest income driven by an increase in prevailing rates and a higher average cash balance.
In August 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 (“IRA”), was signed into law. Among other things, the IRA imposes a 15% corporate alternative minimum tax (the “Corporate AMT”) for tax years beginning after December 31, 2022 and levies a 1% excise tax on net stock repurchases after December 31, 2022. The excise tax on the net repurchase, the Corporate AMT or other provisions of the IRA did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position for the first quarter of fiscal 2024.The effective income tax rate was 26.2% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to 31.1% for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. The decrease in the first quarter of fiscal 2024 effective income tax rate was primarily due to the first quarter of fiscal 2023 reflecting the impairment of our minority investment in Familia with no estimated tax benefit that was partially offset by the resolution of various tax matters.
Net income for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was $0.9 billion, or $0.76 per diluted share compared with $0.6 billion, or $0.49 per diluted share for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. The $218 million impairment on our equity investment in Familia had a $0.19 negative impact on earnings per share for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. Foreign currency had a neutral impact on earnings per share for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to a $0.02 positive impact on earnings per share for the first quarter of fiscal 2023.Subsequent to the end of the quarter, we announced that we will be offering eligible, former TJX Associates who have not yet commenced their qualified pension plan benefit an opportunity to receive a voluntary lump sum payout of their vested pension plan benefit. As a result, we anticipate an immaterial non-cash settlement charge. This potential non-cash settlement charge is expected to be incurred in the third quarter of fiscal 2024 and would impact our pretax profit margin and earnings per share results.
We operate four main business segments. Our Marmaxx segment (T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, tjmaxx.com and marshalls.com) and our HomeGoods segment (HomeGoods, Homesense and homegoods.com) both operate in the United States. Our TJX Canada segment operates Winners, HomeSense and Marshalls in Canada, and our TJX International segment operates T.K. Maxx, Homesense and tkmaxx.com in Europe and T.K. Maxx in Australia. In addition to our four main segments, Sierra operates retail stores and sierra.com in the U.S. The results of Sierra are included in the Marmaxx segment.We evaluate the performance of our segments based on “segment profit or loss,” which we define as pre-tax income or loss before general corporate expense and interest (income) expense, net, and certain separately disclosed unusual or infrequent items. “Segment profit or loss,” as we define the term, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies. The terms “segment margin” or “segment profit margin” are used to describe segment profit or loss as a percentage of net sales. These measures of performance should not be considered an alternative to net income or cash flows from operating activities as an indicator of our performance or as a measure of liquidity.Presented below is selected financial information related to our business segments.
Net sales for Marmaxx were $7.4 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, an increase of 7% compared to $6.9 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. This increase in the first quarter was driven by a 5% increase from comp store sales and a 2% increase from non comp store sales. The increase in comp store sales was attributable to an increase in customer traffic. For the first quarter ended April 29, 2023, strong apparel sales outperformed a decline in home fashions sales. All geographies generally performed in line with the overall comp store sales increase.
Segment profit margin increased to 14.0% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to 13.2% for the same period last year. The increase in segment profit margin for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was driven by improved merchandise margin and leverage on higher comp store sales, primarily in occupancy costs, partially offset by increased administrative costs. Within merchandise margin, favorable freight costs and higher markon were partially offset by higher shrink accrual rates in the current year.Our Marmaxx e-commerce sites, tjmaxx.com and marshalls.com, together with sierra.com, represented less than 3% of Marmaxx’s net sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023, and did not have a significant impact on year-over-year segment margin comparisons.
Net sales for HomeGoods were approximately $2 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, a decrease of 3%, compared to approximately $2 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. This decrease in the first quarter reflects a 7% decrease from comp store sales, partially offset by a 4% increase from non-comp store sales. The decrease in comp store sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was driven by a decrease in average basket due to lower average ticket and a decrease in customer traffic. All geographies performed in line with the overall comp store sales decline.
Segment profit margin increased to 7.3% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to 6.0% for the same period last year. The increase in segment profit margin for the first quarter was driven by higher merchandise margin, partially offset by deleverage on lower comp store sales, primarily in occupancy and administrative costs, and higher store payroll expenses. Merchandise margin increased due to favorable freight costs.Our HomeGoods e-commerce website, homegoods.com, represented less than 1% of HomeGoods net sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, and did not have a significant impact on year-over-year segment margin comparisons.
(a)Comp store sales reported for fiscal 2024 and was not applicable for fiscal 2023.
Net sales for TJX Canada were $1 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, a decrease of 4%, compared to $1.1 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. This decrease in the first quarter reflects a negative foreign currency exchange rate impact of 7%, partially offset by a 2% increase in non-comp store sales and a 1% increase in comp store sales. The increase in comp store sales for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was driven by an increase in customer traffic, partially offset by a decrease in average basket.
Segment profit margin decreased to 11.3% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to 11.7% for the same period last year. The decrease for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was driven by expense deleverage on administrative costs and higher supply chain costs, which were partially offset by higher merchandise margin. Merchandise margin reflects favorable freight costs, partially offset by higher shrink accrual rates in the current year.
(a)Comp store sales reported for fiscal 2024 and was not applicable for fiscal 2023.
Net sales for TJX International were $1.4 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2024, flat compared to $1.4 billion for the first quarter of fiscal 2023. Net sales were flat due to a 4% increase in comp store sales and a 2% increase in non-comp store sales offset by a negative foreign currency exchange rate impact of 6% in the first quarter of fiscal 2024. The increase in comp store sales was driven by an increase in both customer traffic and average basket. E-commerce sales represented less than 4% of TJX International’s net sales for the first quarters of both fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023.
Segment profit margin increased to 2.7% for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 compared to 0.9% for the same period last year. This increase is primarily due to higher merchandise margin driven by strong markon and the favorable impact of transactional foreign exchange, partially offset by higher administrative and store payroll expenses.
General corporate expense for segment reporting purposes represents those costs not specifically related to the operations of our business segments. General corporate expenses are primarily included in SG&A expenses. The mark-to-market adjustment of our fuel and inventory hedges is included in cost of sales, including buying and occupancy costs. The increase in general corporate expense for the first quarter of fiscal 2024 was primarily driven by the mark-to-market adjustment on fuel and inventory hedges.
Our liquidity requirements have traditionally been funded through cash generated from operations, supplemented, as needed, by short-term bank borrowings and the issuance of commercial paper. As of April 29, 2023, there were no short-term bank borrowings or commercial paper outstanding. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, internally generated funds and our credit facilities, under which facilities we have $1.5 billion available as of the period ended April 29, 2023, as described in Note I—Long-Term Debt and Credit Lines of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, are adequate to meet our operating needs for the foreseeable future. As of April 29, 2023, we held $5 billion in cash. Approximately $1.1 billion of our cash was held by our foreign subsidiaries with $0.6 billion held in countries where we intend to indefinitely reinvest any undistributed earnings. We have provided for all applicable state and foreign withholding taxes on all undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries in Canada, Puerto Rico, Italy, India, Hong Kong and Vietnam through April 29, 2023. If we repatriate cash from such subsidiaries, we should not incur additional tax expense and our cash would be reduced by the amount of withholding taxes paid. We monitor debt financing markets on an ongoing basis and from time to time may incur additional long-term indebtedness depending on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, existing economic conditions and other factors. In fiscal 2024 we have used, and in the future we may continue to use, operating cash flow and cash on hand to repay portions of our indebtedness, depending on prevailing market conditions, liquidity requirements, existing economic conditions, contractual restrictions and other factors. As such, we may, from time to time, seek to retire, redeem, prepay or purchase our outstanding debt through redemptions, cash purchases, prepayments, refinancings and/or exchanges, in open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions, by tender offer or otherwise. If we use our operating cash flow and/or cash on hand to repay our debt, it will reduce the amount of cash available for additional capital expenditures.
Operating activities resulted in net cash inflows of $0.7 billion for the three months ended April 29, 2023 and net cash outflows of $0.6 billion for the three months ended April 30, 2022. Operating cash flows increased compared to fiscal 2023 primarily due to the change in merchandise inventories net of accounts payable, due to elevated inventories in the prior year attributable to larger in-transit inventory associated with the fiscal 2023 supply chain delays.
Investing activities resulted in net cash outflows of $0.4 billion for the three months ended April 29, 2023 and $0.3 billion for the three months ended April 30, 2022. The cash outflows for both periods were driven by capital expenditures.Investing activities in the first three months of fiscal 2024 primarily reflected property additions for store improvements and renovations, investments in our new stores, as well as investments in our distribution centers and offices, including information technology. We anticipate that capital spending for the full fiscal year 2024 will be approximately $1.7 billion to $1.9 billion. We plan to fund these expenditures with our existing cash balances and through internally generated funds.
Financing activities resulted in net cash outflows of $0.8 billion for the first three months of fiscal 2024 and net cash outflows of $0.9 billion for the first three months of fiscal 2023. The cash outflows for both periods were driven by equity repurchases and dividend payments.
Our $500 million 2.500% ten-year Notes due May 2023, included within our current maturities of long-term debt as of April 29, 2023, were paid from operating funds during the second quarter of fiscal 2024 upon maturity. For further information regarding long-term debt, see Note I—Long-Term Debt and Credit Lines of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Under our stock repurchase programs, we paid $0.5 billion to repurchase and retire 6.4 million shares of our stock on a settlement basis in the first three months of fiscal 2024. As of April 29, 2023, approximately $3 billion remained available under our existing stock repurchase programs. We paid $0.6 billion to repurchase and retire 9.6 million shares of our stock on a settlement basis in the first three months of fiscal 2023. We currently plan to repurchase approximately $2 billion to $2.5 billion of stock under our stock repurchase programs in fiscal 2024.
The Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, which became law in August 2022, levies a 1% excise tax on net stock repurchases after December 31, 2022. Beginning on January 1, 2023, these purchases are subject to the excise tax. The excise tax on the net stock repurchase portion of the IRA did not have a material impact on our results of operations or financial position in the first quarter of fiscal 2024. See Note J—Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
We declared quarterly dividends on our common stock of $0.3325 per share in the first three months of fiscal 2024 and $0.295 per share in the first three months of fiscal 2023. Cash payments for dividends on our common stock totaled $0.3 billion for both the first three months of fiscal 2024 and fiscal 2023.
There have been no material changes to the critical accounting estimates as discussed in TJX's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 28, 2023. For a discussion of accounting standards, see Note A—Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in TJX’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 28, 2023 and Note A—Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
Various statements made in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q are forward-looking and involve a number of risks and uncertainties. All statements that address activities, events or developments that we intend, expect or believe may occur in the future are forward-looking statements, including, among others, statements regarding the Company's business plans, anticipated share repurchases, plans with respect to long-term indebtedness, and the Company's plans related to, and expected impact of, a pension payout offer. These statements are typically accompanied by the words “aim,” “anticipate,” “aspire,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “should,” “estimate,” “expect,” “forecast,” “goal,” “hope,” “intend,” “may,” “plan,” “project,” “potential,” “seek,” “strive,” “target,” “will,” “would,” or similar words, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words. Each forward-looking statement is subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Applicable risks and uncertainties include, among others, execution of buying strategy and inventory management; customer trends and preferences; competition; various marketing efforts; operational and business expansion; management of large size and scale; merchandise sourcing and transport; data security and maintenance and development of information technology systems; labor costs and workforce challenges; personnel recruitment, training and retention; corporate and retail banner reputation; evolving corporate governance and public disclosure regulations and expectations with respect to environmental, social and governance matters; expanding international operations; fluctuations in quarterly operating results and market expectations; inventory or asset loss; cash flow; mergers, acquisitions, or business investments and divestitures, closings or business consolidations; real estate activities; economic conditions and consumer spending; market instability; severe weather, serious disruptions or catastrophic events; disproportionate impact of disruptions in the second half of the fiscal year; commodity availability and pricing; fluctuations in currency exchange rates; compliance with laws, regulations and orders and changes in laws, regulations and applicable accounting standards; outcomes of litigation, legal proceedings and other legal or regulatory matters; quality, safety and other issues with our merchandise; tax matters; and other factors that may be described in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”), including our most recent Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC. You are encouraged to read our filings with the SEC, available at www.sec.gov, for a discussion of these and other risks and uncertainties. We caution investors, potential investors and others not to place considerable reliance on the forward-looking statements contained in this Form 10-Q. The forward-looking statements in this report speak only as of the date of this Form 10-Q, and we do not undertake any obligation to publicly update or revise our forward-looking statements, even if experience or future changes make it clear that any projected results expressed or implied in such statements will not be realized.