
Trane Technologies plc is a global climate innovator. We bring sustainable and efficient solutions to buildings, homes and transportation through our strategic brands, Trane® and Thermo King®, and our environmentally responsible portfolio of products, services and connected intelligent controls.
Our commitment to sustainability extends to the environmental and social impacts of our people, operations, products and services. We have announced ambitious sustainability commitments with a goal of achieving these commitments by 2030 (2030 Sustainability Commitments), including our Gigaton Challenge to reduce customers' carbon emissions by a billion metric tons. We are one of a handful of companies whose emissions reductions targets have been validated three times by the Science Based Targets Initiative (SBTi), and one of the very few companies worldwide whose net-zero targets have also been validated. We are Leading by Example as we make progress toward carbon-neutral operations and zero waste-to-landfill across our global footprint and net positive water use in water-stressed locations. Our Opportunity for All commitment focuses on gender parity in leadership, workforce diversity reflective of our communities, and a citizenship strategy that helps underserved communities through enhanced learning environments and pathways to green and Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) careers.
On May 2, 2023, we completed the acquisition of MTA S.p.A (MTA), a leading technology industrial process cooling business, which will bring complementary, high-performing solutions to the comprehensive Trane Commercial HVAC product and services portfolios in EMEA and North America. The results of the acquisition will be reported primarily within the EMEA segment.
In March 2023, we issued $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.250% senior notes due 2033. The net proceeds were used to fund the redemption of the $700.0 million aggregate principal amount of the outstanding 4.250% Senior Notes due June 2023.
On June 18, 2020 (Petition Date), our indirect wholly-owned subsidiaries, Aldrich Pump LLC (Aldrich) and Murray Boiler LLC (Murray) each filed a voluntary petition for reorganization under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States Code (the Bankruptcy Code) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Western District of North Carolina in Charlotte (the Bankruptcy Court). As a result of the Chapter 11 filings, all asbestos-related lawsuits against Aldrich and Murray have been stayed due to the imposition of a statutory automatic stay applicable in Chapter 11 bankruptcy cases. Only Aldrich and Murray have filed for Chapter 11 relief. Neither Aldrich's wholly-owned subsidiary, 200 Park, Inc. (200 Park), Murray's wholly-owned subsidiary, ClimateLabs LLC (ClimateLabs), Trane Technologies plc nor its other subsidiaries (the Trane Companies) are part of the Chapter 11 filings.The goal of these Chapter 11 filings is to resolve equitably and permanently all current and future asbestos-related claims in a manner beneficial to claimants and to Aldrich and Murray through court approval of a plan of reorganization that would create a trust pursuant to section 524(g) of the Bankruptcy Code, establish claims resolution procedures for all current and future asbestos-related claims against Aldrich and Murray and channel such claims to the trust for resolution in accordance with those procedures.Aldrich and its wholly-owned subsidiary 200 Park and Murray and its wholly-owned subsidiary ClimateLabs were deconsolidated as of the Petition Date and their respective assets and liabilities were derecognized from our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.In 2021, Aldrich and Murray reached an agreement in principle with the court-appointed legal representative of future asbestos claimants (the FCR) and filed a motion to create a $270.0 million trust intended to constitute a "qualified settlement fund" within the meaning of the Treasury Regulations under Section 468B of the Internal Revenue Code (QSF). On January 27, 2022, the Bankruptcy Court granted the request to fund the QSF, which was funded on March 2, 2022, resulting in an operating cash outflow of $270.0 million in our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows, of which $91.8 million was allocated to continuing operations and $178.2 million was allocated to discontinued operations for the three months ended March 31, 2022. At this point in the Chapter 11 cases of Aldrich and Murray, it is not possible to predict whether the Bankruptcy Court will approve the terms of a plan of reorganization (the Plan), what the extent of the asbestos liability will be or how long the Chapter 11 cases will last. The Chapter 11 cases remain pending as of May 3, 2023.See also the discussion in Note 17, "Commitments and Contingencies," to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
We are a global corporation with worldwide operations. As a global business, our operations are affected by worldwide, regional and industry-specific economic factors as well as political and social factors wherever we operate or do business. Our geographic diversity and the breadth of our product and services portfolios have helped mitigate the impact of any one industry or the economy of any single country on our consolidated operating results. Given our broad range of products manufactured and geographic markets served, management uses a variety of factors to predict the outlook for the Company. We monitor key competitors and customers in order to gauge relative performance and the outlook for the future. We regularly perform detailed evaluations of the different market segments we are serving to proactively detect trends and to adapt our strategies accordingly, including potential actions to be taken under recessionary scenarios. In addition, we believe our backlog and order levels are indicative of future revenue and thus are a key measure of anticipated performance.Current economic conditions remain mixed across our end markets. We continue to see residual effects from the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) global pandemic impacting both the global Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) and Transport refrigeration end markets as disruptions and delays in the global supply chain and resource constraints continue to be experienced. However, despite these challenges, overall end market demand remained healthy as we continued to proactively manage global supply chain and resource constraints by working closely with our suppliers, customers and logistics providers to mitigate the impacts of our business as we continue to sell, install and service our products. We expect market conditions to remain mixed across the geographies where we serve our customers. We continue to see material cost, wage and energy inflation impact our results of operations. Our performance continues to depend on future developments that are uncertain and include macroeconomic events including tightening financial conditions, higher interest rates and global banking uncertainty which could increase the likelihood of deteriorating economic conditions which could negatively impact our business. We believe we have a solid foundation of global brands that are highly differentiated across our portfolio of products and services. Our geographic mix and the diversity of our portfolio, coupled with our large installed product base, provides growth opportunities within our service, parts and replacement revenue streams. As part of our long-term sustainability strategy, we innovate to provide solutions for our customers to address the impacts of these factors. In addition, we are investing substantial resources to innovate and develop new and existing products and services which we expect will drive our future growth.
Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 9.2%, or $310.3 million, compared with the same period in 2022, which resulted from the following:
The increase in Net revenues was primarily driven by realization of inflation-based price increases enacted in the prior year, higher volumes driven by increased end-customer demand within all our reportable segments and incremental revenues from acquisitions, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation. Refer to the “Results by Segment” below for a discussion of Net revenues by segment.
Gross profit margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased 170 basis points to 31.2% compared to 29.5% for the same period of 2022 primarily due to price realization and productivity, partially offset by material and other inflation related to supply chain challenges and higher costs to serve customers.
Selling and administrative expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 14.3%, or $85.9 million compared with the same period of 2022. The increase in Selling and administrative expenses was primarily driven by an increase in human capital related costs as a result of investing in our people and customer facing travel costs. Selling and administrative expenses as a percentage of Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased 80 basis points from 17.9% to 18.7%.
Interest expense for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 2.9%, or $1.6 million compared with the same period of 2022 primarily due to the issuance of $700.0 million of 5.250% senior notes due March 2033, partially offset by the redemption of $700.0 million of 4.250% senior notes due June 2023.
The components of Other income/(expense), net for the three months ended March 31 were as follows:
Other income/(expense), net includes the results from activities other than core business operations such as interest income and foreign currency gains and losses on transactions that are denominated in a currency other than an entity’s functional currency. In addition, we include the components of net periodic benefit credit/(cost) for pension and postretirement obligations other than the service cost component. Other activity, net primarily includes items associated with certain legal and tax matters, as well as activities related to Murray.
For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022 our effective tax rate was 18.8% and 18.4%, respectively, which was lower than the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to excess tax benefits from employee share-based payments and earnings in non-U.S. jurisdictions, which in aggregate have a lower effective tax rate, partially offset by U.S. state and local taxes.
We operate under four regional operating segments designed to create deep customer focus and relevance in markets around the world. We determined that our two EMEA operating segments meet the aggregation criteria based on similar operating and economic characteristics, resulting in one reportable segment. Therefore, we have three regional reportable segments, Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific.•Our Americas segment innovates for customers in North America and Latin America. The Americas segment encompasses commercial heating, cooling and ventilation systems, building controls, and energy services and solutions; residential heating and cooling; and transport refrigeration systems and solutions.•Our EMEA segment innovates for customers in the Europe, Middle East and Africa region. The EMEA segment encompasses heating, cooling and ventilation systems, services and solutions for commercial buildings, and transport refrigeration systems and solutions. •Our Asia Pacific segment innovates for customers throughout the Asia Pacific region. The Asia Pacific segment encompasses heating, cooling and ventilation systems, services and solutions for commercial buildings and transport refrigeration systems and solutions.Management measures operating performance based on net earnings excluding interest expense, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, restructuring, non-cash adjustment for contingent consideration, merger and acquisition related costs, unallocated corporate expenses and discontinued operations (Segment Adjusted EBITDA). Segment Adjusted EBITDA is not defined under generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (GAAP) and may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures used by other companies and should not be considered a substitute for net earnings or other results reported in accordance with GAAP. We believe Segment Adjusted EBITDA provides the most relevant measure of profitability as well as earnings power and the ability to generate cash. This measure is a useful financial metric to assess our operating performance from period to period by excluding certain items that we believe are not representative of our core business and we use this measure for business planning purposes. Segment Adjusted EBITDA also provides a useful tool for assessing the comparability between periods and our ability to generate cash from operations sufficient to pay taxes, to service debt and to undertake capital expenditures because it eliminates non-cash charges such as depreciation and amortization expense. The following discussion compares our results for each of our three reportable segments for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022.
Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 8.7% or $227.8 million, compared with the same period of 2022.The components of the period change were as follows:
The increase in Net revenues was primarily driven by realization of inflation-based price increases enacted in the prior year, higher volumes driven by increased end-customer demand and incremental revenues from acquisitions.Segment Adjusted EBITDA margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 50 basis points to 15.9% compared to 15.4% for the same period in 2022 primarily due to price realization and productivity, partially offset by material and other inflation related to supply chain challenges and higher costs to serve customers and continued business reinvestment.
Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 15.7% or $69.2 million, compared with the same period of 2022. The components of the period change were as follows:
The increase in Net revenues was driven by realization of inflation-based price increases enacted in the prior year, higher volumes driven by increased end-customer demand and incremental revenues from acquisitions, partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation and acquisitions, Net revenues increased by 15.4%.Segment Adjusted EBITDA margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 510 basis points to 18.5% compared to 13.4% for the same period of 2022, primarily due to price realization, productivity and higher volumes partially offset by material and other inflation related to supply chain challenges and higher costs to serve customers, lower margin realization from recent acquisition and continued business reinvestment.
Net revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 4.7% or $13.3 million, compared with the same period of 2022. The components of the period change were as follows:
The increase in Net revenues was primarily driven by higher volumes related to increased end-market demand. Realization of inflation-based price increases enacted in the prior year and incremental revenues from acquisitions were partially offset by an unfavorable impact from foreign currency translation. Excluding the impact of foreign currency translation and acquisitions, Net revenues increased by 8.4%Segment Adjusted EBITDA margin for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by 390 basis points to 19.4% compared to 15.5% for the same period of 2022 primarily due to price realization, productivity and higher volumes partially offset by material and other inflation related to supply chain challenges and higher costs to serve customers, lower margin realization from recent acquisition and continued business reinvestment.
We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. In doing so, we review and analyze our current cash on hand, the number of days our sales are outstanding, inventory turns, capital expenditure commitments and income tax payments. Our cash requirements primarily consist of the following:•Funding of working capital•Debt service requirements•Funding of capital expenditures•Dividend payments•Funding of acquisitions, joint ventures and equity investments•Share repurchasesOur primary sources of liquidity include cash balances on hand, cash flow from operations, proceeds from debt offerings, commercial paper, and borrowing availability under our existing credit facilities. We earn a significant amount of our operating income in jurisdictions where it is deemed to be permanently reinvested. Our most prominent jurisdiction of operation is the U.S. We expect existing cash and cash equivalents available to the U.S. operations, the cash generated by our U.S. operations, our committed credit lines as well as our expected ability to access the capital and debt markets will be sufficient to fund our U.S. operating and capital needs for at least the next twelve months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. In addition, we expect existing non-U.S. cash and cash equivalents and the cash generated by our non-U.S. operations will be sufficient to fund our non-U.S. operating and capital needs for at least the next twelve months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. The maximum aggregate amount of unsecured commercial paper notes available to be issued, on a private placement basis, under the commercial paper program is $2.0 billion, of which we had no outstanding balance as of March 31, 2023. As of March 31, 2023, we had $692.9 million of cash and cash equivalents on hand, of which $584.0 million was held by non-U.S. subsidiaries. Cash and cash equivalents held by our non-U.S. subsidiaries are generally available for use in our U.S. operations via intercompany loans, equity infusions or via distributions from direct or indirectly owned non-U.S. subsidiaries for which we do not assert permanent reinvestment. In general, repatriation of cash to the U.S. can be completed with no significant incremental U.S. tax. However, to the extent that we repatriate funds from non-U.S. subsidiaries for which we assert permanent reinvestment to fund our U.S. operations, we would be required to accrue and pay applicable non-U.S. taxes. As of March 31, 2023, we currently have no plans to repatriate funds from subsidiaries for which we assert permanent reinvestment.We expect to pay a competitive and growing dividend. Since the launch of Trane Technologies in March 2020, we have increased our quarterly share dividend by 42%, from $0.53 to $0.75 per ordinary share, or $2.12 to $3.00 per share annualized. The first quarter 2023 dividend was paid in March 2023 and the second quarter 2023 was declared in April 2023 to be paid in June 2023. Share repurchases are made from time to time in accordance with management's capital allocation strategy, subject to market conditions and regulatory requirements. In February 2022, our Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program of up to $3.0 billion of our ordinary shares (2022 Authorization) upon the completion of our $2.0 billion ordinary share repurchase program authorized in 2021 (2021 Authorization). During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we repurchased and canceled approximately $300 million of our ordinary shares, thus completing the 2021 Authorization and initiating repurchases under the 2022 Authorization of approximately $100 million of our ordinary shares leaving $2.9 billion remaining under the 2022 Authorization. We continue to actively manage and strengthen our business portfolio to meet the current and future needs of our customers. We achieve this partly through engaging in research and development and sustaining activities and partly through acquisitions. Sustaining activities include costs incurred to reduce production costs, improve existing products, create custom solutions for customers and provide support to our manufacturing facilities. Our research and development and sustaining costs account for approximately two percent of annual net revenues. Each year, we make investments in new product development and new technology innovation as they are key factors in achieving our strategic objectives as a leader in the climate sector. In addition, we make investments in technology and our business for our operational sustainability programs. For example, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, we entered into a new renewable energy agreement for our Clarksville, Tennessee facility, which translates to an annual Scope 2 carbon reduction in excess of 7,000 metric tons. Ongoing construction and commissioning activities are underway for the two new onsite solar energy generation systems at our Pueblo, Colorado and Monterrey, Mexico facilities to generate electricity to offset fossil based electricity purchased from the grid. We also transitioned to a next generation refrigerant with low global warming potential (GWP) for transport refrigeration equipment manufactured at our Hastings, Nebraska facility and are continuing work to transition to low GWP refrigerant on our first commercial product at our Pueblo, Colorado factory. These actions represent important steps to reduce our Scope 1 and Scope 2 carbon emissions and improve our customer’s carbon performance over the operating life of Trane Technologies’ equipment. These Leading by Example successes did not result in material expenditures for the three months ended March 31, 2023. We continue to look for similar improvement opportunities including, but not limited to, increasing energy efficiency, developing products that allow for use of lower GWP refrigerants, reducing material content in products, and designing products for circularity. All new product development (NPD) programs must complete a Design for Sustainability module within our NPD process to ensure that every program has a positive impact on sustainability. We also focus on partnering with our suppliers and technology providers to align their investment decisions with our technical requirements.In pursuing our business strategy, we routinely conduct discussions, evaluate targets and enter into agreements regarding possible acquisitions, divestitures, joint ventures and equity investments. Since 2020, we acquired several businesses, entered into joint ventures and invested in companies that complement existing products and services further enhancing our product portfolio. We incur costs associated with restructuring initiatives intended to result in improved operating performance, profitability and working capital levels. Actions associated with these initiatives may include workforce reductions, improving manufacturing productivity, realignment of management structures and rationalizing certain assets. Post separation, we have reduced costs by approximately $240 million through December 31, 2022 and expect to reduce costs by an additional $60 million during 2023 for a total of $300 million in total annual savings under our transformation initiatives. In order to achieve these cost savings, we anticipate to incur costs up to $150 million through 2023. We have incurred approximately $131 million of costs cumulatively through March 31, 2023. We believe that our existing cash flow, committed credit lines and access to the capital markets will be sufficient to fund share repurchases, dividends, research and development, sustaining activities, business portfolio changes and ongoing restructuring actions.Certain of our subsidiaries entered into Funding Agreements with Aldrich and Murray pursuant to which those subsidiaries are obligated, among other things, to pay the costs and expenses of Aldrich and Murray during the pendency of the Chapter 11 cases to the extent distributions from their respective subsidiaries are insufficient to do so and to provide an amount for the funding for a trust established pursuant to section 524(g) of the Bankruptcy Code, to the extent that the other assets of Aldrich and Murray are insufficient to provide the requisite trust funding. During the third quarter of 2021, Aldrich and Murray filed a motion with the Bankruptcy Court to create a $270 million QSF. The funds held in the QSF would be available to provide funding for the Section 524(g) Trust upon effectiveness of the Plan. On January 27, 2022, the Bankruptcy Court granted the request to fund the QSF, which was funded on March 2, 2022.
The following table contains several key measures of our financial condition and liquidity at the period ended:
As of March 31, 2023, our short-term obligations primarily consist of $340.8 million of fixed rate debentures that contain a put feature that the holders may exercise on each anniversary of the issuance date. If exercised, we are obligated to repay in whole or in part, at the holder’s option, the outstanding principal amount (plus accrued and unpaid interest) of the debentures held by the holder. We also maintain a commercial paper program which is used for general corporate purposes. Under the program, the maximum aggregate amount of unsecured commercial paper notes available to be issued, on a private placement basis, is $2.0 billion. We had no commercial paper outstanding at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. See Note 6, "Debt and Credit Facilities," to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the terms of our short-term obligations.Our long-term obligations primarily consist of long-term debt with final maturity dates ranging between 2024 and 2049. In addition, we maintain two $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facilities, one of which matures in June 2026 and the other which matures in April 2027. The facilities provide support for our commercial paper program and can be used for working capital and other general corporate purposes. Total commitments of $2.0 billion were unused at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. See Note 6, "Debt and Credit Facilities," to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements and further below in Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information for additional information regarding the terms of our long-term obligations and their related guarantees.
The following table reflects the major categories of cash flows for the three months ended March 31. For additional details, see the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Net cash provided by continuing operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was $16.8 million, of which Net earnings provided $431.2 million after adjusting for non-cash transactions. Net cash used in continuing operating activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was $3.9 million, of which Net earnings provided $366.4 million after adjusting for non-cash transactions. The year-over-year increase in net cash from continuing operating activities was primarily due to higher net earnings, partially offset by higher working capital balances. Additionally, during the three months ended March 31, 2022, we funded the continuing operations component of the QSF for $91.8 million.
Cash flows from investing activities represent inflows and outflows regarding the purchase and sale of assets. Primary activities associated with these items include capital expenditures, proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment, acquisitions, investments in joint ventures and complementary businesses and divestitures. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $91.0 million. The primary driver of the usage was attributable to capital expenditures of $77.1 million. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $82.7 million. The primary driver of the usage was attributable to capital expenditures of $74.8 million.
Cash flows from financing activities represent inflows and outflows that account for external activities affecting equity and debt. Primary activities associated with these actions include paying dividends to shareholders, repurchasing our own shares, issuing our own stock and debt transactions. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $459.2 million. The primary drivers of the outflow related to the repurchase of $300.0 million in ordinary shares and dividends paid to ordinary shareholders of $170.3 million. In addition, we received $699.1 million in proceeds from the issuance of 5.250% senior notes due March 2033 which was offset by the redemption of $700.0 million of senior notes due June 2023. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations was $534.6 million. The primary drivers of the outflow related to the repurchase of $350.0 million in ordinary shares and dividends paid to ordinary shareholders of $155.9 million.
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP measure and defined as Net cash provided by (used in) continuing operating activities adjusted for capital expenditures, cash payments for restructuring, transformation costs, merger and acquisition (M&A) related costs and the continuing operations component of the QSF funding. This measure is useful to management and investors because it is consistent with management's assessment of our operating cash flow performance. The most comparable GAAP measure to free cash flow is Net cash provided by (used in) continuing operating activities. Free cash flow may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures used by other companies and should not be considered a substitute for Net cash provided by (used in) continuing operating activities in accordance with GAAP.A reconciliation of Net cash provided by (used in) continuing operating activities to free cash flow for the three months ended March 31 is as follows:
(1) Represents a non-GAAP measure.
Our investment objective in managing defined benefit plan assets is to ensure that all present and future benefit obligations are met as they come due. We seek to achieve this goal while trying to mitigate volatility in plan funded status, contribution and expense by better matching the characteristics of the plan assets to that of the plan liabilities. We use a dynamic approach to asset allocation whereby a plan's allocation to fixed income assets increases as the plan's funded status improves. We monitor plan funded status and asset allocation regularly in addition to investment manager performance.We monitor the impact of market conditions on our defined benefit plans on a regular basis. None of our defined benefit pension plans have experienced a significant impact on their liquidity due to market volatility. The Company currently projects that it will contribute a total of approximately $70 million to our enterprise plans worldwide in 2023. For further details on pension plan activity, see Note 9, "Pensions and Postretirement Benefits Other than Pensions," to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Trane Technologies plc (Plc or Parent Company) and certain of its 100% directly or indirectly owned subsidiaries provide guarantees of public debt issued by other 100% directly or indirectly owned subsidiaries of Plc. The following table shows our guarantor relationships as of March 31, 2023:
Each subsidiary debt issuer and guarantor is owned 100% directly or indirectly by the Parent Company. Each guarantee is full and unconditional, and provided on a joint and several basis. There are no significant restrictions of the Parent Company, or any guarantor, to obtain funds from its subsidiaries, such as provisions in debt agreements that prohibit dividend payments, loans or advances to the Parent Company by a subsidiary. The following tables present summarized financial information for the Parent Company and subsidiary debt issuers and guarantors on a combined basis (together, "obligor group") after elimination of intercompany transactions and balances based on the Company’s legal entity ownerships and guarantees outstanding at March 31, 2023. Our obligor groups as of March 31, 2023 were as follows: Obligor group 1 consists of Plc, TT Holdings, TT International, TT Global, TTFL, TTC HoldCo and TTC; Obligor group 2 consists of Plc, TTFL and TTC.
For a further discussion of Liquidity and Capital Resources, refer to the discussion under that heading herein and in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” contained in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the period ended December 31, 2022.
We are involved in various litigation, claims and administrative proceedings, including those related to the bankruptcy proceedings for Aldrich and Murray and environmental and product liability matters. Amounts recorded for identified contingent liabilities are estimates, which are reviewed periodically and adjusted to reflect additional information when it becomes available. Subject to the uncertainties inherent in estimating future costs for contingent liabilities, except as expressly set forth in Note 17, "Commitments and Contingencies," to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, management believes that the liability which may result from these legal matters would not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity or cash flows.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are based upon our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with those accounting principles requires management to use judgments in making estimates and assumptions based on the relevant information available at the end of each period. These estimates and assumptions have a significant effect on reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities because they result primarily from the need to make estimates and assumptions on matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results may differ from estimates.Management believes there have been no significant changes during the three months ended March 31, 2023, to the items that we disclosed as our critical accounting estimates in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
See Note 2, "Recent Accounting Pronouncements," to the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Certain statements in this report, other than purely historical information, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. These forward-looking statements generally are identified by the words “believe,” “project,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “forecast,” “outlook,” “intend,” “strategy,” “plan,” "may", “might,” “could,” “should,” “will,” “would,” “will be,” “will continue,” “will likely result,” or the negative thereof or variations thereon or similar terminology generally intended to identify forward-looking statements.Forward-looking statements may relate to such matters as projections of revenue, margins, expenses, tax provisions, earnings, cash flows, benefit obligations, share or debt repurchases or other financial items; any statements of the plans, strategies and objectives of management for future operations, including those relating to any statements concerning expected development, performance or market share relating to our products and services; any statements regarding future economic conditions or our performance including our future performance statements related to the continued impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic; any statements regarding our sustainability commitments; any statements regarding pending investigations, claims or disputes; any statements of expectation or belief; and any statements of assumptions underlying any of the foregoing. These statements are based on currently available information and our current assumptions, expectations and projections about future events. While we believe that our assumptions, expectations and projections are reasonable in view of the currently available information, you are cautioned not to place undue reliance on our forward-looking statements. You are advised to review any further disclosures we make on related subjects in materials we file with or furnish to the SEC. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made and are not guarantees of future performance. They are subject to future events, risks and uncertainties - many of which are beyond our control - as well as potentially inaccurate assumptions, that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations and projections. We do not undertake to update any forward-looking statements.Factors that might affect our forward-looking statements include, among other things:•overall economic, political and business conditions in the markets in which we operate including recessions, economic downturns, financial institution disruptions, price instability, slowing economic growth and social and political instability;•impacts of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our business operations, financial results and financial position and on the world economy;•commodity shortages, supply chain risks and price increases;•national and international conflict, including war, civil disturbances and terrorist acts, such as the Russia-Ukraine conflict;•trade protection measures such as import or export restrictions and requirements, the imposition of tariffs and quotas or revocation or material modification of trade agreements;•competitive factors in the industries in which we compete;•the development, commercialization and acceptance of new and enhanced products and services;•attracting and retaining talent;•work stoppages, union negotiations, labor disputes and similar issues;•other capital market conditions, including availability of funding sources, interest rate fluctuations and other changes in borrowing costs;•currency exchange rate fluctuations, exchange controls and currency devaluations;•the outcome of any litigation, governmental investigations, claims or proceedings;•risks and uncertainties associated with the Chapter 11 proceedings for our deconsolidated subsidiaries Aldrich Pump LLC and Murray Boiler LLC;•the impact of potential information technology system failures, vulnerabilities, data security breaches or other cybersecurity issues;•evolving data privacy and protection laws;•intellectual property infringement claims and the inability to protect our intellectual property rights;•changes in laws and regulations;•health epidemics or pandemics or other contagious outbreaks;•climate change, changes in weather patterns, natural disasters and seasonal fluctuations;•national, regional and international regulations and policies associated with climate change and the environment;•the outcome of any tax audits or settlements;•the strategic acquisition or divestiture of businesses, product lines and joint ventures;•impairment of our goodwill, indefinite-lived intangible assets and/or our long-lived assets; and•changes in tax laws and requirements (including tax rate changes, new tax laws, new and/or revised tax law interpretations and any legislation that may limit or eliminate potential tax benefits resulting from our incorporation in a non-U.S. jurisdiction, such as Ireland).Some of the significant risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations and projections are described more fully in the "Risk Factors" section of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2022. There may also be other factors that have not been anticipated or that are not described in our periodic filings with the SEC, generally because we did not believe them to be significant at the time, which could cause results to differ materially from our expectations.
We have used, and intend to continue to use, the homepage, the investor relations and the “News” section of our website (www.tranetechnologies.com), among other sources such as press releases, public conference calls and webcasts, as a means of disclosing additional information, which may include future developments regarding the Company and/or material non-public information. We encourage investors, the media, and others interested in our Company to review the information it makes public in these locations on its website.