
Verizon Communications Inc. (the Company) is a holding company that, acting through its subsidiaries (together with the Company, collectively, Verizon), is one of the world’s leading providers of communications, technology, information and entertainment products and services to consumers, businesses and government entities. With a presence around the world, we offer data, video and voice services and solutions on our networks and platforms that are designed to meet customers’ demand for mobility, reliable network connectivity, security and control. To compete effectively in today’s dynamic marketplace, we are focused on the capabilities of our high-performing networks to drive growth based on delivering what customers want and need in the digital world. In 2023, we are focused on maintaining the reliability and resilience of our network, retaining and growing our high-quality customer base while balancing profitability in challenging market conditions, and driving monetization of our networks, platforms and solutions. We are creating business value by earning the trust of our stakeholders, limiting our environmental impact and supporting our customer base growth while creating social benefit through our products and services. Our strategy requires significant capital investments primarily to acquire wireless spectrum, put the spectrum into service, provide additional capacity for growth in our networks, invest in the fiber that supports our businesses, evolve and maintain our networks and develop and maintain significant advanced information technology systems and data system capabilities. We believe that our C-Band spectrum, together with our industry leading millimeter wave spectrum holding, fourth-generation (4G) Long-Term Evolution (LTE) network and fiber infrastructure, will drive innovative products and services and fuel our growth.We are consistently deploying new network architecture and technologies to secure our leadership in both 4G and fifth-generation (5G) wireless networks. We expect that our next-generation multi-use platform, which we call the Intelligent Edge Network, will simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, speed the deployment of 5G wireless technology and create new opportunities in the business market in a cost efficient manner. Our network quality is the hallmark of our brand and the foundation for the connectivity, platforms and solutions upon which we build our competitive advantage.
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Verizon Consumer Group (Consumer) and Verizon Business Group (Business).
Note: Excludes eliminations.
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in the United States (U.S.) under the Verizon brand, TracFone Wireless, Inc. (TracFone) brands and through wholesale and other arrangements. We also provide fixed wireless access (FWA) broadband through our wireless networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by Fios. Our Consumer segment's wireless and wireline products and services are available to our retail customers, as well as resellers that purchase wireless network access from us on a wholesale basis.Customers can obtain our wireless services on a postpaid or prepaid basis. Our postpaid service is generally billed one month in advance for a monthly access charge in return for access to and usage of network services. Our prepaid service is offered only to Consumer customers and enables individuals to obtain wireless services without credit verification by paying for all services in advance. The Consumer segment also offers several categories of wireless equipment to customers, including a variety of smartphones and other handsets, wireless-enabled internet devices, such as tablets, and other wireless-enabled connected devices, such as smart watches.In addition to the wireless services and equipment discussed above, the Consumer segment sells residential fixed connectivity solutions, including internet, video and voice services, and wireless network access to resellers on a wholesale basis. The Consumer segment's operating revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 totaled $24.9 billion, representing a decrease of 1.7% compared to the similar period in 2022. See "Segment Results of Operations" for additional information regarding our Consumer segment’s operating performance and selected operating statistics.
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various Internet of Things (IoT) services and products, including solutions that support fleet tracking management, compliance management, field service management, asset tracking and other types of mobile resource management. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. We provide these products and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around the world. The Business segment's operating revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 totaled $7.5 billion, representing a decrease of 2.8% compared to the similar period in 2022. See "Segment Results of Operations" for additional information regarding our Business segment’s operating performance and selected operating statistics.
Corporate and other primarily includes insurance captives, investments in unconsolidated businesses and development stage businesses that support our strategic initiatives, as well as unallocated corporate expenses, certain pension and other employee benefit related costs and interest and financing expenses. Corporate and other also includes the historical results of divested businesses and other adjustments and gains and losses that are not allocated in assessing segment performance due to their nature. Although such transactions are excluded from the business segment results, they are included in reported consolidated earnings. Gains and losses from these transactions that are not individually significant are included in segment results as these items are included in the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance. See "Consolidated Results of Operations" for additional information regarding Corporate and other results.
We continue to invest in our wireless networks, high-speed fiber and other advanced technologies to position ourselves at the center of growth trends for the future. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, these investments included $6.0 billion for capital expenditures. See "Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities" for additional information. We have substantially completed the accelerated $10 billion capital program related to our C-Band spectrum deployment. The ongoing C-Band deployment will be funded through our capital expenditure program. Capital expenditures for 2023 are expected to be in the range of $18.25 billion to $19.25 billion. We believe that our investments aimed at expanding our portfolio of products and services will provide our customers with an efficient, reliable infrastructure for participating in the information economy.
We are focusing our capital investment on adding capacity and density to our 4G LTE network, while also building our next generation 5G network. We are densifying our networks by utilizing macro and small cell technology, in-building solutions and distributed antenna systems. Network densification enables us to add capacity to address increasing mobile video consumption and the growing demand for IoT products and services on our 4G LTE and 5G networks. Over the past several years, we have been leading the development of 5G wireless technology industry standards and the ecosystems for fixed and mobile 5G wireless services. 5G technology enables higher throughput and lower latency than 4G LTE technology and allows our networks to handle more traffic as the number of internet-connected devices grows. In January 2022, we began rapidly deploying our C-Band spectrum, which, as of March 31, 2023, covers more than 200 million people in the U.S. We expect to continue deploying C-Band spectrum across the continental U.S. as more and more of the spectrum becomes available for our use. We use low and mid-band spectrum and dynamic spectrum sharing (DSS) technology to allow 5G service to run simultaneously with 4G LTE on multiple spectrum bands. With DSS, whenever customers move outside Verizon’s millimeter wave and C-Band coverage areas, their 5G-enabled devices will remain on 5G technology using the lower spectrum bands where this network is available. This allows us to more fully and effectively utilize our current spectrum resources to serve both 4G and 5G customers.To compensate for the shrinking market for traditional copper-based products, we continue to build fiber-based networks supporting data, video and advanced business services - areas where demand for reliable high-speed connections is growing. In addition, we leverage our 5G network for our FWA broadband service. We are transforming the architecture of our networks into our Intelligent Edge Network, providing improved efficiency and virtualization, increased automation and opportunities for edge computing services that will support our fiber-based and radio access network technologies. We expect that this new architecture will simplify operations by eliminating legacy network elements, speed the deployment of 5G wireless technology and create new opportunities in the business market in a cost-efficient manner.
In this section, we discuss our overall results of operations and highlight special items, some of which are not included in our segment results. In "Segment Results of Operations" we review the performance of our two reportable segments in more detail.
Consolidated operating revenues decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to revenue decreases in our Consumer and Business segments.Revenues for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results of Operations."
Operating expenses for our segments are discussed separately below under the heading "Segment Results of Operations."
Cost of services includes the following costs directly attributable to a service: salaries and wages, benefits, materials and supplies, content costs, contracted services, network access and transport costs, customer provisioning costs, computer systems support, costs to support our outsourcing contracts and technical facilities and traffic acquisition costs. Aggregate customer service costs, which include billing and service provisioning, are allocated between Cost of services and Selling, general and administrative expense.Cost of services decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to: •a decrease of $120 million in access costs primarily due to ongoing efforts to migrate off network subscribers to the Verizon network, which was accelerated by the shutdown of our competitors' third-generation (3G) networks;•a decrease of $87 million in digital content costs primarily due to offerings that occurred in 2022 that did not reoccur;•a decrease of $87 million in other direct costs related to professional services; and•an increase of $137 million in regulatory costs related to a higher Federal Universal Service Fund (FUSF) rate.
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to: •a decrease of $807 million driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to fewer phone upgrades; and•an increase of $110 million due to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless devices sold.
Selling, general and administrative expense includes salaries and wages and benefits not directly attributable to a service or product, the provision for credit losses, taxes other than income taxes, advertising and sales commission costs, call center and information technology costs, regulatory fees, professional service fees and rent and utilities for administrative space. Also included is a portion of the aggregate customer care costs as discussed above in "Cost of Services."Selling, general and administrative expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•an increase of $202 million in the provision for credit losses resulting from additional bad debt reserves as collections return to pre-pandemic levels;•an increase of $55 million in advertising costs related to marketing;•an increase of $45 million in personnel costs primarily driven by third-party employee costs due to contracted services as well as an increase in sales commission expenses; •an increase of $43 million in data and network systems related to information technology contracts; and•a decrease of $49 million primarily driven by regulatory surcharges.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to the change in the mix of net depreciable and amortizable assets, including acquisition-related intangible assets, as well as the deployment of the C-Band network.
Additional information relating to Other income (expense), net is as follows:
nm - not meaningfulOther income (expense), net, reflects certain items not directly related to our core operations, including interest income, gains and losses from non-operating asset dispositions, debt extinguishment costs, components of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit cost and income and certain foreign exchange gains and losses.Other income (expense), net changed during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to net debt extinguishment gains of $70 million related to open market repurchases of various Company notes in 2023, compared with losses of $1.2 billion primarily related to tender offers in 2022.
(1)The average debt outstanding is a financial measure and is calculated by applying a simple average of prior months end balances of total short-term and long-term debt, net of discounts, premiums and unamortized debt issuance costs.(2)The effective interest rate is the rate of actual interest incurred on debt. It is calculated by dividing the total interest costs on debt balances by the average debt outstanding. (3)We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating our debt financing cost and trends in our debt leverage management.Total interest expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to an increase in interest costs due to higher average interest rates, partially offset by lower average debt balances.
The effective income tax rate is calculated by dividing the provision for income taxes by income before the provision for income taxes. The increase in the provision for income taxes during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, was primarily due to the increase in income before income taxes in the current period. The effective income tax rate during the three months ended March 31, 2023 is comparable to the similar period in 2022.
Unrecognized tax benefits were $2.7 billion and $2.8 billion at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits were $529 million (after-tax) and $544 million (after-tax) at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. The decrease in unrecognized tax benefits was primarily due to lapses of statutes of limitations in the current period.Verizon and/or its subsidiaries file income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, and various state, local and foreign jurisdictions. As a large taxpayer, we are under audit by the Internal Revenue Service and multiple state and foreign jurisdictions for various open tax years. It is reasonably possible that the amount of the liability for unrecognized tax benefits could change by a significant amount in the next twelve months. An estimate of the range of the possible change cannot be made until these tax matters are further developed or resolved.
Consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense (Consolidated EBITDA) and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA, which are presented below, are non-generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) measures that we believe are useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a more variable cost basis as they exclude the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to Verizon’s competitors. Consolidated EBITDA is calculated by adding back interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization expense to net income.Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by excluding from Consolidated EBITDA the effect of the following non-operational items: equity in earnings and losses of unconsolidated businesses and other income and expense, net, as well as the effect of certain special items. We believe that this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating the effectiveness of our operations and underlying business trends in a manner that is consistent with management’s evaluation of business performance. We believe that Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA is widely used by investors to compare a company’s operating performance to its competitors by minimizing impacts caused by differences in capital structure, taxes, and depreciation and amortization policies. Further, the exclusion of non-operational items and special items enables comparability to prior period performance and trend analysis. See "Special Items" for additional information.It is management’s intent to provide non-GAAP financial information to enhance the understanding of Verizon’s GAAP financial information, and it should be considered by the reader in addition to, but not instead of, the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. Each non-GAAP financial measure is presented along with the corresponding GAAP measure so as not to imply that more emphasis should be placed on the non-GAAP measure. We believe that providing these non-GAAP measures in addition to the GAAP measures allows management, investors and other users of our financial information to more fully and accurately assess both consolidated and segment performance. The non-GAAP financial information presented may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to that of other companies.
(1) Includes Amortization of acquisition-related intangible assets, which were $208 million and $238 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. See "Special Items" for additional information.(2) Includes Early debt redemption costs, which were $1.2 billion during the three months ended March 31, 2022. See "Special Items" and "Other Income (Expense), Net" for additional information.The changes in Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA in the table above during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
We have two reportable segments that we operate and manage as strategic business units - Consumer and Business. We measure and evaluate our segments based on segment operating income. The use of segment operating income is consistent with the chief operating decision maker’s assessment of segment performance.To aid in the understanding of segment performance as it relates to segment operating income, management uses the following operating statistics to evaluate the overall effectiveness of our segments. We believe these operating statistics are useful to investors and other users of our financial information because they provide additional insight into drivers of our segments’ operating results, key trends and performance relative to our peers. These operating statistics may be determined or calculated differently by other companies and may not be directly comparable to those statistics of other companies.Wireless retail connections are retail customer device postpaid and prepaid connections as of the end of the period. Retail connections under an account may include those from smartphones and basic phones (collectively, phones), postpaid and prepaid FWA, as well as tablets and other internet devices, wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail connections are calculated by adding total retail postpaid and prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail connections, and subtracting total retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects in the period. Wireless retail postpaid connections are retail postpaid customer device connections as of the end of the period. Retail postpaid connections under an account may include those from phones, postpaid FWA, as well as tablets and other internet devices, wearables and retail IoT devices. Wireless retail postpaid connections are calculated by adding retail postpaid new connections in the period to prior period retail postpaid connections, and subtracting retail postpaid disconnects in the period. Wireless retail prepaid connections are retail prepaid customer device connections as of the end of the period. Retail prepaid connections may include those from phones, prepaid FWA, as well as tablets and other internet devices, and wearables. Wireless retail prepaid connections are calculated by adding retail prepaid new connections in the period to prior period retail prepaid connections, and subtracting retail prepaid disconnects in the period.Fios internet connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet services as of the end of the period. Fios internet connections are calculated by adding Fios internet new connections in the period to prior period Fios internet connections, and subtracting Fios internet disconnects in the period.Fios video connections are the total number of connections to traditional linear video programming using Fios video services as of the end of the period. Fios video connections are calculated by adding Fios video net additions in the period to prior period Fios video connections. Fios video net additions are calculated by subtracting the Fios video disconnects from the Fios video new connections.Total broadband connections are the total number of connections to the internet using Fios internet services, Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), and postpaid, prepaid and IoT FWA as of the end of the period. Total broadband connections are calculated by adding total broadband connections, net additions in the period to prior period total broadband connections. Wireless retail connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer device postpaid and prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total retail postpaid and prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total retail postpaid and prepaid new connections in the period. Wireless retail postpaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer device postpaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail postpaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail postpaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail postpaid new connections in the period. Wireless retail prepaid connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer device prepaid connections, less the number of device disconnects in the period. Wireless retail prepaid connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail prepaid disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail prepaid new connections in the period.Wireless retail postpaid phone connections, net additions are the total number of additional retail customer postpaid phone connections, less the number of phone disconnects in the period. Wireless retail postpaid phone connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the retail postpaid phone disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the retail postpaid phone new connections in the period. Total broadband connections, net additions are the total number of additional total broadband connections, less the number of total broadband disconnects in the period. Total broadband connections, net additions in each period presented are calculated by subtracting the total broadband disconnects, net of certain adjustments, from the total broadband new connections in the period. Wireless Churn is the rate at which service to retail, retail postpaid, or retail postpaid phone connections is terminated on average in the period. The churn rate in each period presented is calculated by dividing retail disconnects, retail postpaid disconnects, or retail postpaid phone disconnects by the average retail connections, average retail postpaid connections, or average retail postpaid phone connections, respectively, in the period. Wireless retail postpaid ARPA is the calculated average retail postpaid service revenue per account (ARPA) from retail postpaid accounts in the period. Wireless retail postpaid service revenue does not include recurring device payment plan billings related to the Verizon device payment program, plan billings related to device warranty and insurance or regulatory fees. Wireless retail postpaid ARPA in each period presented is calculated by dividing retail postpaid service revenue by the average retail postpaid accounts in the period. Wireless retail postpaid accounts are wireless retail customers that are directly served and managed under the Verizon brand and use its services as of the end of the period. Accounts include unlimited plans, shared data plans and corporate accounts, as well as legacy single connection plans and multi-connection family plans. A single account may include monthly wireless services for a variety of connected devices. Wireless retail postpaid accounts are calculated by adding retail postpaid new accounts to the prior period retail postpaid accounts. Wireless retail postpaid connections per account is the calculated average number of retail postpaid connections per retail postpaid account as of the end of the period. Wireless retail postpaid connections per account is calculated by dividing the total number of retail postpaid connections by the number of retail postpaid accounts as of the end of the period.Segment operating income margin reflects the profitability of the segment as a percentage of revenue. Segment operating income margin is calculated by dividing total segment operating income by total segment operating revenues. Segment earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (Segment EBITDA), which is presented below, is a non-GAAP measure and does not purport to be an alternative to operating income (loss) as a measure of operating performance. We believe this measure is useful to management, investors and other users of our financial information in evaluating operating profitability on a more variable cost basis as it excludes the depreciation and amortization expense related primarily to capital expenditures and acquisitions that occurred in prior years, as well as in evaluating operating performance in relation to our competitors. Segment EBITDA is calculated by adding back depreciation and amortization expense to segment operating income (loss). Segment EBITDA margin is calculated by dividing Segment EBITDA by total segment operating revenues. See Note 10 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Our Consumer segment provides consumer-focused wireless and wireline communications services and products. Our wireless services are provided across one of the most extensive wireless networks in the U.S. under the Verizon brand, TracFone brands and through wholesale and other arrangements. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. Our wireline services are provided in nine states in the Mid-Atlantic and Northeastern U.S., as well as Washington D.C., over our 100% fiber-optic network through our Verizon Fios product portfolio and over a traditional copper-based network to customers who are not served by Fios.
(1)As of end of periodWhere applicable, the operating results reflect certain adjustments, including those related to migration activity among different types of devices and plans, customer profile changes, and adjustments in connection with mergers, acquisitions and divestitures.nm - not meaningfulConsumer’s total operating revenues decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, as a result of decreases in Wireless equipment and Other revenues, partially offset by an increase in Service revenue.
Service revenue increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily driven by an increase in wireless service revenue.Wireless service revenue increased $382 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily due to: •an increase of $369 million in access revenues related to our postpaid plans primarily driven by the pricing actions implemented in the second half of 2022; a larger allocation of administrative and telco recovery charges, which partly recover network operating costs, to Wireless service revenue from Other revenue; an increase in our FWA subscriber base; and the inclusion of mobile security products in certain device protection packages such that a larger amount of the overall device protection revenue is recognized in Service revenue. These increases were partially offset by the amortization of wireless equipment sales promotions;•an increase of $72 million in non-retail service revenue;•an increase of $71 million in TravelPass revenue related to an increase in customer international travel; and •a decrease of $125 million in prepaid revenue primarily due to a decrease in subscriber base related to TracFone.For both the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, Fios service revenue totaled $2.7 billion and remained relatively flat.
Wireless equipment revenue decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease of $751 million driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to fewer phone upgrades; and•an increase of $256 million related to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless devices sold.
Other revenue includes fees that partially recover the direct and indirect costs of complying with regulatory and industry obligations and programs, revenues associated with certain products included in our device protection offerings, leasing and interest when equipment is sold to the customer by an authorized agent under a device payment plan agreement.Other revenue decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease of $287 million in revenue primarily related to a larger allocation of administrative and telco recovery charges, which partly recover network operating costs, to Wireless service revenue from Other revenue;•a decrease of $50 million in device protection revenue primarily related to an update to the device protection offering which increased the price of the bundled offering and changed the product mix such that a smaller amount of the overall device protection revenue is recognized in Other Revenue; and•an increase of $102 million primarily related to a higher FUSF rate along with resulting surcharges.
Cost of services decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease of $131 million in access costs primarily due to ongoing efforts to migrate off network subscribers to the Verizon network, which was accelerated by the shutdown of our competitors' 3G networks;•a decrease of $70 million in digital content costs primarily due to offerings that occurred in 2022 that did not reoccur;•an increase of $98 million in regulatory costs related to a higher FUSF rate;•an increase of $54 million in personnel costs mainly driven by valuation assumption changes in connection with certain post-employment benefits, partially offset by a decrease in third-party employee costs from contracted services; and•an increase of $30 million in rent and lease expense primarily driven by new leases and lease modifications related to the deployment of C-Band.
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease of $690 million driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to fewer phone upgrades; and•an increase of $69 million related to a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless devices sold.
Selling, general and administrative expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•an increase of $179 million in the provision for credit losses resulting from additional bad debt reserves as collections return to pre-pandemic levels;•an increase of $123 million in personnel costs primarily related to third-party employee costs due to contracted services as well as an increase in sales commission expenses; and •an increase of $75 million in advertising costs related to marketing.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, driven by the change in the mix of total Verizon depreciable and amortizable assets and Consumer's usage of those assets.
The changes in the table above during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
Our Business segment provides wireless and wireline communications services and products, including data, video and conferencing services, corporate networking solutions, security and managed network services, local and long distance voice services and network access to deliver various IoT services and products. We also provide FWA broadband through our wireless networks. We provide these products and services to businesses, government customers and wireless and wireline carriers across the U.S. and select products and services to customers around the world. During the first quarter of 2023, Verizon reorganized the customer groups within its Business segment. Previously, this segment was comprised of four customer groups: Small and Medium Business, Global Enterprise, Public Sector and Other, and Wholesale. Following the reorganization, there are now three customer groups: Enterprise and Public Sector, Business Markets and Software as a Service (SaaS), and Wholesale. Enterprise and Public Sector combines the customers previously included in Global Enterprise and Public Sector and Other (excluding BlueJeans and Connect) as well as the commercial wireline customers previously included in Small and Medium Business. Business Markets and SaaS combines the customers previously included in Small and Medium Business (excluding commercial wireline customers), the BlueJeans customers previously included in Global Enterprise and Public Sector and Other, and the Connect customers previously included in Public Sector and Other. The Wholesale customer group remained unchanged. Prior period operating revenue results within the Business segment have been recast for these reorganized customer groups. There was no change to the composition of our reportable segments and total segment results, nor the determination of segment profit.
(1)Service and other revenues included in our Business segment were approximately $6.6 billion and $6.7 billion for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Wireless equipment revenues included in our Business segment were approximately $882 million and $962 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively.(2)As of end of periodWhere applicable, the operating results reflect certain adjustments, including those related to migration activity among different types of devices and plans, customer profile changes, and adjustments in connection with mergers, acquisitions and divestitures.Business’s total operating revenues decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, as a result of decreases in Enterprise and Public Sector and Wholesale revenues, partially offset by an increase in Business Markets and SaaS revenue.
Enterprise and Public Sector offers wireless products and services as well as wireline connectivity and managed solutions to our large business and government customers. Large businesses are identified based on their size and volume of business with Verizon. Public sector offers these services with features and pricing designed to address the needs of U.S. federal, state and local governments and educational institutions.Enterprise and Public Sector revenues decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease of $217 million in networking revenue and traditional data and voice communication services along with related professional services, driven by secular pressures in the marketplace;•a decrease of $24 million in wireless equipment revenue driven by a lower volume of devices sold, partially offset by a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of devices sold;•an increase of $36 million in customer premise equipment primarily due to higher volumes; and•an increase of $26 million primarily related to a higher FUSF rate.
Business Markets and SaaS offers wireless services and equipment, conferencing services, tailored voice and networking products, Fios services, Internet Protocol networking, advanced voice solutions and security and managed information technology services to our businesses that do not meet the requirements to be categorized as Enterprise and Public Sector, as described above. SaaS includes solutions that support fleet tracking management, compliance management, field service management, asset tracking and other types of mobile resource management.Business Markets and SaaS revenues increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•an increase in wireless service revenue of $143 million primarily driven by an increase in the number of wireless retail postpaid connections as well as the economic adjustment charge that took effect in the second quarter of 2022 and a larger allocation of administrative and telco recovery charges, which partly recover network operating costs, to Wireless service revenue from Other revenue;•a decrease of $55 million in wireless equipment revenue driven by a lower volume of devices sold and a shift to lower priced equipment in the mix of devices sold, partially offset by a decrease in promotions; •a decrease of $23 million in other revenue primarily related to a larger allocation of administrative and telco recovery charges, which partly recover network operating costs, to Wireless service revenue from Other revenue; and•a decrease of $21 million related to the loss of voice and DSL service connections.For both the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, Fios revenues totaled $230 million and remained relatively flat.
Wholesale offers wireline communications services including data, voice, local dial tone and broadband services primarily to local, long distance, and wireless carriers that use our facilities to provide services to their customers.Wholesale revenues decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar periods in 2022, primarily due to a decrease of $52 million related to declines in traditional voice communication and network connectivity as a result of technology substitution, as well as a decrease in core data.
Cost of services decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar periods in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease in other direct costs of $88 million related to professional services;•an increase of $38 million in regulatory costs related to a higher FUSF rate; and•an increase of $29 million in customer premise equipment due to higher volumes.
Cost of wireless equipment decreased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to:•a decrease of $127 million driven by a lower volume of wireless devices sold primarily related to fewer phone upgrades; and•an increase of $51 million driven by a shift to higher priced equipment in the mix of wireless devices sold.
Selling, general and administrative expense remained relatively flat during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar periods in 2022.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, driven by the change in the mix of total Verizon depreciable and amortizable assets and Business's usage of those assets.
The changes in the table above during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, were primarily a result of the factors described in connection with operating revenues and operating expenses.
Special items included in Income Before Provision For Income Taxes were as follows:
(1) Amounts are included in segment results of operations.The Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA non-GAAP measure presented in the Consolidated Net Income, Consolidated EBITDA and Consolidated Adjusted EBITDA discussion (see "Consolidated Results of Operations") excludes all of the amounts included above, as described below.The income and expenses related to special items included in our condensed consolidated results of operations were as follows:
During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we recorded pre-tax amortization expense of $208 million and $238 million, respectively, related to acquired intangible assets.
During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we recorded pre-tax early debt redemption costs of $1.2 billion primarily in connection with tender offers. See Note 5 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We use the net cash generated from our operations to fund expansion and modernization of our networks, service and repay external financing, pay dividends, invest in new businesses and spectrum and, when appropriate, buy back shares of our outstanding common stock. Our sources of funds, primarily from operations and, to the extent necessary, from external financing arrangements, are sufficient to meet ongoing operating and investing requirements over the next 12 months and beyond.Our cash and cash equivalents are held both domestically and internationally, and are invested to maintain principal and provide liquidity. See "Market Risk" for additional information regarding our foreign currency risk management strategies.We expect that our capital spending requirements will continue to be financed primarily through internally generated funds. Debt or equity financing may be needed to fund additional investments or development activities, or to maintain an appropriate capital structure to ensure our financial flexibility. Our external financing arrangements include credit facilities and other bank lines of credit, an active commercial paper program, vendor financing arrangements, issuances of registered debt or equity securities, U.S. retail medium-term notes and other securities that are privately-placed or offered overseas. In addition, we monetize certain receivables through asset-backed debt transactions.
Our primary source of funds continues to be cash generated from operations. Net cash provided by operating activities increased $1.5 billion during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to an improvement in working capital. The improvement in working capital was driven by a change in receivables resulting primarily from fewer phone upgrades and a modest improvement in customer payment patterns, compared to the prior year. Further driving the working capital improvement were lower inventory levels compared to the prior year. This increase was further driven by an increase in earnings. In April 2023, we made a discretionary contribution of $200 million to one of our qualified pension plans. Additionally, we expect that there will be no required pension funding through 2026, subject to changes in market conditions.
Capital expenditures continue to relate primarily to the use of capital resources to enhance the operating efficiency and productivity of our networks, maintain our existing infrastructure, facilitate the introduction of new products and services and enhance responsiveness to competitive challenges. Capital expenditures, including capitalized software, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were $6.0 billion and $5.8 billion, respectively. Capital expenditures increased approximately $137 million during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, primarily due to the acceleration of our 5G technology deployment. See "Global Network and Technology" for more details.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we made payments of $114 million and $1.4 billion, respectively, for obligations related to clearing costs and accelerated clearing incentives associated with Auction 107.During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we recorded capitalized interest related to wireless licenses of $449 million and $452 million, respectively.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we received return of collateral posted of $367 million related to derivative contracts, net of payments. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we made collateral payments of $277 million related to derivative contracts, net of repayments. See Note 7 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We seek to maintain a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to lower borrowing costs within reasonable risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow volatility resulting from changes in market conditions. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, net cash used in financing activities was $2.4 billion. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, net cash provided by financing activities was $245 million.During the three months ended March 31, 2023, our net cash used in financing activities was primarily driven by cash dividends paid of $2.7 billion, repayments and repurchases of long-term borrowings and finance lease obligations of $1.3 billion and repayments of asset-backed long-term borrowings of $931 million. These payments were partially offset by proceeds from asset-backed long-term borrowings of $1.8 billion, proceeds from long-term borrowings of $504 million and net proceeds from short-term commercial paper of $342 million.     At March 31, 2023, our total debt of $152.9 billion included unsecured debt of $132.0 billion and secured debt of $20.8 billion. At December 31, 2022, our total debt of $150.6 billion included unsecured debt of $130.6 billion and secured debt of $20.0 billion. During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, our effective interest rate was 4.6% and 3.4%, respectively. See Note 5 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our debt activity, which excludes the impact from mark-to-market adjustments on foreign currency denominated debt.Verizon may acquire debt securities issued by Verizon and its affiliates through open market purchases, redemptions, privately negotiated transactions, tender offers, exchange offers, or otherwise, upon such terms and at such prices as Verizon may from time to time determine, for cash or other consideration.
Cash collections on the receivables collateralizing our asset-backed debt securities are required at certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts. Deposits to the segregated accounts are considered restricted cash and are included in Prepaid expenses and other and Other assets in our condensed consolidated balance sheets. Proceeds from our asset-backed debt transactions are reflected in Cash flows from financing activities in our condensed consolidated statements of cash flows. The asset-backed debt issued is included in Debt maturing within one year and Long-term debt in our condensed consolidated balance sheets. See Note 5 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information.
(1) The revolving credit facility does not require us to comply with financial covenants or maintain specified credit ratings, and it permits us to borrow even if our business has incurred a material adverse change. The revolving credit facility provides for the issuance of letters of credit. As of March 31, 2023, there have been no drawings against the $9.5 billion revolving credit facility since its inception.(2) During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, we drew down $515 million and $2.0 billion, respectively, from these facilities. Borrowings under certain of these facilities are amortized semi-annually in equal installments up to the applicable maturity dates. Maturities reflect maturity dates of principal amounts outstanding. Any amounts borrowed under these facilities and subsequently repaid cannot be reborrowed.
Other, net financing activities during the three months ended March 31, 2023 includes $500 million in proceeds from a short-term revolving credit facility, $117 million in payments for settlement of cross currency swaps, and $102 million payment for TracFone contingent consideration.
As in prior periods, dividend payments were a significant use of capital resources. We paid $2.7 billion in cash dividends during both the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022.
Our credit agreements contain covenants that are typical for large, investment grade companies. These covenants include requirements to pay interest and principal in a timely fashion, pay taxes, maintain insurance with responsible and reputable insurance companies, preserve our corporate existence, keep appropriate books and records of financial transactions, maintain our properties, provide financial and other reports to our lenders, limit pledging and disposition of assets and mergers and consolidations, and other similar covenants.We and our consolidated subsidiaries are in compliance with all of our restrictive covenants in our debt agreements.
Our Cash and cash equivalents at March 31, 2023 totaled $2.2 billion, a $371 million decrease compared to December 31, 2022, primarily as a result of the factors discussed above.Restricted cash totaled $1.7 billion and $1.5 billion as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively, primarily related to cash collections on certain receivables that are required at certain specified times to be placed into segregated accounts.
Free cash flow is a non-GAAP financial measure that reflects an additional way of viewing our liquidity that, we believe, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides management, investors and other users of our financial information with a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our cash flows. Free cash flow is calculated by subtracting capital expenditures (including capitalized software) from net cash provided by operating activities. We believe it is a more conservative measure of cash flow since capital expenditures are necessary for ongoing operations. Free cash flow has limitations due to the fact that it does not represent the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures. For example, free cash flow does not incorporate payments made on finance lease obligations or cash payments for business acquisitions or wireless licenses. Therefore, we believe it is important to view free cash flow as a complement to our entire condensed consolidated statements of cash flows.The following table reconciles net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow:
The increase in free cash flow during the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared to the similar period in 2022, is a reflection of the increase in operating cash flows, partially offset by the increase in capital expenditures, both of which are discussed above.
As of March 31, 2023, Verizon had 25 renewable energy purchase agreements (REPAs) with third parties. See Note 12 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information. Under the REPAs, we plan to purchase up to an aggregate of approximately 3.2 gigawatts of capacity across multiple states, including Arizona, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Texas and West Virginia.
We are exposed to various types of market risk in the normal course of business, including the impact of interest rate changes, foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations, changes in investment, equity and commodity prices and changes in corporate tax rates. We employ risk management strategies, which may include the use of a variety of derivatives including cross currency swaps, forward starting interest rate swaps, interest rate swaps, interest rate caps, treasury rate locks and foreign exchange forwards. We do not hold derivatives for trading purposes.It is our general policy to enter into interest rate, foreign currency and other derivative transactions only to the extent necessary to achieve our desired objectives in optimizing exposure to various market risks. Our objectives include maintaining a mix of fixed and variable rate debt to lower borrowing costs within reasonable risk parameters and to protect against earnings and cash flow volatility resulting from changes in market conditions. We do not hedge our market risk exposure in a manner that would completely eliminate the effect of changes in interest rates and foreign exchange rates on our earnings.Counterparties to our derivative contracts are major financial institutions with whom we have negotiated derivatives agreements (ISDA master agreements) and credit support annex (CSA) agreements which provide rules for collateral exchange. The CSA agreements contain rating based thresholds such that we or our counterparties may be required to hold or post collateral based upon changes in outstanding positions as compared to established thresholds and changes in credit ratings. We do not offset fair value amounts recognized for derivative instruments and fair value amounts recognized for the right to reclaim cash collateral or the obligation to return cash collateral arising from derivative instruments recognized at fair value. At March 31, 2023, we did not hold any collateral. At March 31, 2023, we posted $1.9 billion of collateral related to derivative contracts under collateral exchange agreements, which was recorded as Prepaid expenses and other in our condensed consolidated balance sheet. At December 31, 2022, we did not hold any collateral. At December 31, 2022, we posted $2.3 billion of collateral related to derivative contracts under collateral exchange arrangements, which was recorded as Prepaid expenses and other in our condensed consolidated balance sheet. While we may be exposed to credit losses due to the nonperformance of our counterparties, we consider the risk remote and do not expect that any such nonperformance would result in a significant effect on our results of operations or financial condition due to our diversified pool of counterparties. See Note 7 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the derivative portfolio.
We are exposed to changes in interest rates, primarily on our short-term debt and the portion of long-term debt that carries floating interest rates. As of March 31, 2023, approximately 73% of the aggregate principal amount of our total debt portfolio consisted of fixed-rate indebtedness, including the effect of interest rate swap agreements designated as hedges. The impact of a 100-basis-point change in interest rates affecting our floating rate debt would result in a change in annual interest expense, including our interest rate swap agreements that are designated as hedges, of approximately $435 million. The interest rates on our existing long-term debt obligations are unaffected by changes to our credit ratings.Certain of our floating rate debt and certain of our interest rate derivative transactions utilize interest rates that are linked to the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (LIBOR) as the benchmark rate. The U.S. dollar LIBOR rates utilized in these transactions will cease publication after June 30, 2023, in accordance with recent U.S. and international regulatory guidance for reform. The consequences of these developments cannot be entirely predicted but could include an increase in the cost of our floating rate debt or exposure under our interest rate derivative transactions. Outstanding debt and derivative transactions that are still benchmarked to LIBOR are expected to be repaid or transitioned to interest rates that are linked to the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR) as the benchmark rate on or before June 30, 2023. We do not anticipate a significant impact to our financial position given our current mix of variable and fixed-rate debt and taking into account the impact of our interest rate hedging. In 2021, we began utilizing interest rates that are linked to the SOFR as the benchmark rate for various floating rate transactions.
We enter into interest rate swaps to achieve a targeted mix of fixed and variable rate debt. We principally receive fixed rates and pay variable rates, resulting in a net increase or decrease to Interest expense. These swaps are designated as fair value hedges and hedge against interest rate risk exposure of designated debt issuances. At March 31, 2023, there was no amount related to the fair value of the asset and the fair value of the liability of these contracts was $3.9 billion. At December 31, 2022, there was no amount related to the fair value of the asset and the fair value of the liability of these contracts was $4.6 billion. At both March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the total notional amount of the interest rate swaps was $26.1 billion.
From time to time we enter into forward starting interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges in order to manage our exposure to interest rate changes on future forecasted transactions. At March 31, 2023, there was no amount related to the fair value of the asset or liability of these contracts. At December 31, 2022, there was no amount related to the fair value of the asset or liability of these contracts. There was no outstanding notional amount for forward starting interest rate swaps at March 31, 2023 or December 31, 2022.
From time to time we enter into treasury rate locks to mitigate our future interest rate risk. There was no outstanding notional amount for treasury rate locks at March 31, 2023 or December 31, 2022.
The functional currency for our foreign operations is primarily the local currency. The translation of income statement and balance sheet amounts of our foreign operations into U.S. dollars is recorded as cumulative translation adjustments, which are included in Accumulated other comprehensive loss in our condensed consolidated balance sheets. Gains and losses on foreign currency transactions are recorded in the condensed consolidated statements of income. At March 31, 2023, our primary translation exposure was to the British Pound Sterling, Euro, and Australian Dollar.
We have entered into cross currency swaps to exchange our British Pound Sterling, Euro, Swiss Franc, Canadian Dollar and Australian Dollar-denominated cash flows into U.S. dollars and to fix our cash payments in U.S. dollars, as well as to mitigate the impact of foreign currency transaction gains or losses. On March 31, 2022, we voluntarily elected to de-designate our cross currency swaps previously designated as cash flow hedges and re-designated the swaps as fair value hedges. Subsequently executed cross currency swaps are also designated as fair value hedges. The fair value of the asset of these contracts was $299 million and $305 million at March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, respectively. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the fair value of the liability of these contracts was $3.5 billion and $3.6 billion, respectively. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the total notional amount of the cross currency swaps was $34.1 billion and $35.0 billion, respectively.
We also have foreign exchange forwards which we use as an economic hedge but for which we have elected not to apply hedge accounting. We enter into British Pound Sterling and Euro foreign exchange forwards to mitigate our foreign exchange rate risk related to non-functional currency denominated monetary assets and liabilities of international subsidiaries.At March 31, 2023, the fair value of the asset and liability of these contracts was insignificant. At December 31, 2022, the fair value of the asset and liability of these contracts was insignificant. At March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, the total notional amount of the foreign exchange forwards was $980 million and $920 million, respectively.
From time to time, we enter into agreements to buy, sell or exchange spectrum licenses. We believe these spectrum license transactions have allowed us to continue to enhance the reliability of our wireless network while also resulting in a more efficient use of spectrum. In February 2021, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) concluded Auction 107 for C-Band wireless spectrum. In accordance with the rules applicable to the auction, Verizon is required to make payments for our allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the auction, which are estimated to be $7.7 billion. During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and March 31, 2022, we made payments of $114 million and $1.4 billion, respectively, for obligations related to clearing costs and accelerated clearing incentives. We expect to continue to make payments related to clearing cost and incentive payment obligations through 2024, which we expect to be $4.7 billion. These payments are dependent on the incumbent license holders' accelerated clearing of the spectrum for Verizon’s use and, therefore, the final timing and amounts could differ based on the incumbent holders’ execution of their clearing process. In accordance with the FCC order, the clearing must be completed by December 2025. The carrying value of the wireless spectrum won in Auction 107 consists of all payments required to participate and purchase licenses in the auction, including Verizon’s allocable share of clearing costs incurred by, and incentive payments due to, the incumbent license holders associated with the auction that we are obligated to pay in order to acquire the licenses. The carrying value also includes capitalized interest to the extent qualifying activities have occurred.In March 2022, Verizon signed agreements with satellite operators in which operators agreed to clear C-Band spectrum in certain markets and frequencies ahead of the previously expected timeframe. This early clearance accelerated Verizon's access to more spectrum in a number of key markets to support its 5G initiatives.See Note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding our spectrum license transactions.
On November 23, 2021 (the Acquisition Date), we completed the acquisition of TracFone Wireless, Inc. (TracFone), a leading provider of prepaid and value mobile services in the U.S. Verizon acquired all of TracFone's outstanding stock in exchange for approximately $3.5 billion in cash, net of cash acquired and working capital and other adjustments, 57,596,544 shares of Verizon common stock valued at approximately $3.0 billion, and up to an additional $650 million in future cash contingent consideration related to the achievement of certain performance measures and other commercial arrangements. The fair value of the Verizon common stock was determined on the basis of its closing market price on the Acquisition Date. The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration as of the Acquisition Date was approximately $560 million, and represents a Level 3 measurement. The contingent consideration payable is based on the achievement of certain revenue and operational targets, measured over a two-year earn out period. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, Verizon made a payment of $102 million related to the contingent consideration, which is reflected in Cash flows from financing activities in our condensed consolidated statements of cash flows. Contingent consideration payments are expected to continue through 2024. See Note 3 to the condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information.
There have been no material changes to regulatory and competitive trends as previously disclosed in "Competition and Related Trends" and "Regulatory Trends" in Part I, Item 1. "Business" and "Operating Environment and Trends" in Part II, Item 7. "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
In this report we have made forward-looking statements. These statements are based on our estimates and assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements include the information concerning our possible or assumed future results of operations. Forward-looking statements also include those preceded or followed by the words "anticipates," "believes," "estimates," "expects," "forecasts," "hopes," "plans" or similar expressions. For those statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. We undertake no obligation to revise or publicly release the results of any revision to these forward-looking statements, except as required by law. Given these risks and uncertainties, readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on such forward-looking statements.The following important factors, along with those discussed elsewhere in this report and in other filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), could affect future results and could cause those results to differ materially from those expressed in the forward-looking statements:•the effects of competition in the markets in which we operate, including any inability to successfully respond tocompetitive factors such as prices, promotional incentives and evolving consumer preferences;•failure to take advantage of, or respond to competitors' use of, developments in technology and address changes inconsumer demand;•performance issues or delays in the deployment of our 5G network resulting in significant costs or a reduction in theanticipated benefits of the enhancement to our networks;•the inability to implement our business strategy; •adverse conditions in the U.S. and international economies, including inflation in the markets in which we operate; •cyber attacks impacting our networks or systems and any resulting financial or reputational impact; •damage to our infrastructure or disruption of our operations from natural disasters, extreme weather conditions, acts of war, terrorist attacks or other hostile acts and any resulting financial or reputational impact; •the impact of public health crises on our operations, our employees and the ways in which our customers use our networks and other products and services;•disruption of our key suppliers’ or vendors' provisioning of products or services, including as a result of geopolitical factors, public health crises or the potential impacts of global climate change; •material adverse changes in labor matters and any resulting financial or operational impact; •changes in the regulatory environment in which we operate, including any increase in restrictions on our ability to operate our networks or businesses; •our high level of indebtedness; •significant litigation and any resulting material expenses incurred in defending against lawsuits or paying awards or settlements;•an adverse change in the ratings afforded our debt securities by nationally accredited ratings organizations or adverse conditions in the credit markets affecting the cost, including interest rates, and/or availability of further financing; •significant increases in benefit plan costs or lower investment returns on plan assets; •changes in tax laws or treaties, or in their interpretation; and •changes in accounting assumptions that regulatory agencies, including the SEC, may require or that result from changes in the accounting rules or their application, which could result in an impact on earnings.