
Wabtec is one of the world’s largest providers of value-added, technology-based locomotives, equipment, systems, and services for the global freight rail and passenger transit industries, as well as the mining, marine and industrial markets. Our highly engineered products, which are intended to enhance safety, improve productivity and reduce maintenance costs for customers, can be found on most locomotives, freight cars, passenger transit cars and buses around the world. Our core products and services are essential in the safe and efficient operation of freight rail and passenger transit vehicles. Wabtec is a global company with operations in over 50 countries and our products can be found in more than 100 countries throughout the world. In the first three months of 2023, approximately 55% of the Company’s net sales came from customers outside the United States.
During the first quarter of 2023, Wabtec continued to execute on our value creation framework by signing a strategic order for new locomotives in Brazil, securing a key order for mining drive systems in high altitude applications and delivering our 500th locomotive to Indian Railways - a significant milestone in our 10-year contract. Our senior unsecured debt was upgraded by Moody's, which reflects resiliency of the business, our balance sheet strength and strong cash generation. Additionally, Wabtec rebranded our Digital Electronics product line to Digital Intelligence; a change that more accurately reflects the complete digital products and services portfolio offered to our customers.During the first quarter of 2022, Wabtec announced Integration 2.0, a three-year strategic initiative to target incremental run rate synergies estimated to be between $75 million and $90 million by 2025. The scope of the review includes consolidating our operating footprint, reducing headcount, streamlining the end-to-end manufacturing process, restructuring the North America distribution channels, expanding operations in low-cost countries and simplifying the business through systems enablement, including the source-to-pay process. Management will also consider additional capital investments to further simplify and streamline the business. The Company anticipates that it will incur one-time restructuring charges of approximately $135 million to $165 million related to this initiative, of which approximately $78 million has been incurred through March 31, 2023. Total estimated initiative charges could change based on the specific programs approved or changes to the scope of the review. During three months ended March 31, 2023, the Company incurred one-time restructuring charges for programs included in the initiative of approximately $9 million, primarily for employee-related costs and asset write downs associated with site consolidations in Europe. Programs approved to date are expected to result in approximately 15 facility closures and impact approximately 1,100 employees. No significant charges related to Integration 2.0 were recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2022. The Company continues to navigate macroeconomic volatility which is impacting our supply chain, results of operations and business results. Impacts for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 are discussed in more detail in the Results of Operations section below. Supply chain disruptions and labor availability have caused component, raw material and chip shortages resulting in an adverse effect on the timing of the Company’s revenue and cash flows. Additionally, broad-based inflation, metals, energy and other commodity costs, transportation and logistics costs, labor costs, and foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations all continue to impact our results.The Russian invasion of Ukraine and the resultant sanctions related to Russia and Belarus have further impacted our supply and distribution channels and caused significant price inflation which had, and are expected to continue to have, adverse effects on Wabtec’s business results. As of March 31, 2023, Wabtec had approximately $14 million of assets related to Russian operations, which were primarily cash and inventory. Management has determined, based on information currently available, that these assets are expected to be recoverable and therefore no impairment has been recorded. This will continue to be monitored and may result in a future impairment charge based on changes in the situation. Management determined that inventory related to operations in Ukraine were not expected to be recoverable and were written off resulting in an insignificant charge during the first quarter of 2022. Remaining assets related to Ukraine and those in Belarus were not significant. The Company utilizes various mitigating actions intended to lessen the impact of macroeconomic volatility. These actions include implementing price escalations and surcharges, driving operational efficiencies through various cost mitigation efforts and discretionary spend management, strategically sourcing materials, reviewing and modifying distribution logistics, and accelerating integration synergies through Integration 2.0. The Company expects to continue to incur increased costs in future quarters. A portion of our workers are represented by labor unions. For 2023, the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers of America (UE), Locals 506 and 618 collective bargaining agreement, covering approximately 1,400 locomotive manufacturing workers in Erie, Pennsylvania, expires on June 9, 2023. Negotiations with UE will officially begin on April 27, 2023. The Company continuously monitors its labor activity.
As previously announced, on June 26, 2022, we detected a cyber security incident which impacted the Company’s network. The Company promptly activated incident response protocols, which included shutting down certain systems, and commenced an investigation of the incident. The Company also notified law enforcement and engaged legal counsel and other third-party incident response and cybersecurity professionals.Based on the Company's assessment, the incident has not had a significant financial impact and the Company does not believe the incident will have a material impact on its business, operations or financial results. The Company maintains cyber insurance, subject to certain deductibles and policy limitations typical for its size and industry.
The following table shows our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations for the periods indicated.
The following table shows the major components of the change in Net sales in the three months ended March 31, 2023 from the three months ended March 31, 2022:
Net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $267 million, or 13.9%, to $2.19 billion compared to the same period in 2022. Organic sales increased $302 million which was primarily attributable to the Freight Segment driven by an increase across all product lines. Equipment sales increased due to higher international locomotive sales and Services sales increased from a larger active locomotive fleet, partially offset by lower deliveries of locomotive modernizations. In addition, Components sales increased due to a higher railcar build, increased railcars in operation, and growth in industrial end-markets, and Digital Intelligence sales increased due to higher demand for on-board locomotive and mining solutions, international Positive Train Control (PTC) sales and technology upgrades. Transit Segment organic sales increased by $58 million primarily as a result of increased demand for Aftermarket products driven by increased infrastructure investment. Sales from acquisitions contributed $21 million in the Freight Segment and unfavorable changes in foreign exchange rates decreased sales by $56 million.
Cost of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $197 million, or 14.8%, to $1.53 billion compared to the same period in 2022. The increase is primarily due to the increase in sales. Cost of sales as a percentage of net sales was 69.7% and 69.1% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase was due to unfavorable product mix between business groups and higher next generation product development costs in Digital Intelligence. These increases were partially offset by operational efficiencies resulting in favorable productivity and higher absorption rates, benefits from structured cost actions taken through Integration 2.0 and prior years restructuring and integration projects, and the effects of foreign exchange rates. Costs of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 included $4 million and $5 million, respectively, of restructuring costs, primarily for headcount actions and footprint rationalization, with the amounts in 2023 being related to Integration 2.0.
Total operating expenses increased $33 million, or 9.3%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022. Operating expenses as a percentage of sales was 17.7% and 18.4% for the for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Selling, general and administrative expenses ("SG&A") increased $25 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022. The increase is primarily from costs incurred to support the higher sales volume and higher employee compensation and benefit costs, partially offset by the effects of foreign exchange rates. Restructuring costs included in SG&A were $5 million and $2 million for the for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and were primarily for headcount actions and footprint rationalization programs, with the amounts in 2023 primarily related to Integration 2.0. Engineering expense increased $6 million primarily due to investments in new technology.
Interest expense, net, increased $5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in 2022 primarily due to higher effective interest rates in the current period.
The effective income tax rate was 25.5% and 25.1% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The increase in the quarterly effective tax rate is primarily the result of a change in the mix of earnings across jurisdictions. On August 16, 2022, the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 was signed into law. This act includes a new book minimum tax on certain large corporations and an excise tax on corporate stock buybacks among other provisions. This act has not had, and is not expected to have, a material impact on our consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
The following table shows our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations for our Freight Segment for the periods indicated:
The following table shows the major components of the change in net sales for the Freight Segment in the first quarter of 2023 from the first quarter of 2022:
Freight Segment organic sales increased by $244 million driven primarily by: •Equipment sales from higher international locomotive sales•Components sales from higher original equipment railcar build, more railcars in operation and growth in industrial end-markets•Services sales from a larger active locomotive fleet, partially offset by lower deliveries of locomotive modernizations•Digital Intelligence sales due to higher demand for on-board locomotive and mining solutions and technology upgrades and international PTC sales.
Freight Segment Cost of sales increased $188 million and Cost of sales as a percentage of Net sales increased 1.5 percentage points due to:•Higher sales volume •Unfavorable mix within the Freight Segment product lines•Higher next generation product development costs in Digital Intelligence
•Operational efficiencies resulting in favorable productivity and higher absorption ratesCost of sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 included $1 million and $2 million, respectively, of restructuring costs, primarily for headcount actions and footprint rationalization, with the amounts in 2023  related to Integration 2.0.
Freight Segment operating expenses increased by $18 million primarily driven by:•Higher Selling, general and administrative expenses of $14 million resulting from higher costs to support increased sales volume and higher employee compensation and benefits  •Higher investments in new technology increasing Engineering expense by $4 million
The following table shows our Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations for our Transit Segment for the periods indicated:
The following table shows the major components of the change in net sales for the Transit Segment in the first quarter of 2023 from the first quarter of 2022:
Transit Segment organic sales increased by $58 million primarily as a result of increased demand for Aftermarket products driven by increased infrastructure investment, partially offset by a decrease in Original Equipment Manufacturing sales.
Transit Segment Cost of sales increased by $9 million due to: •Higher sales volume
•Improved sales mix•Operational efficiencies driven by structured cost actions taken through Integration 2.0 and prior years' restructuring and integration projects•The effects of foreign exchange ratesCost of sales as a percentage of sales decreased due to the same reasons discussed above. Transit Cost of sales for both the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 includes $3 million of restructuring costs, primarily for footprint rationalization and headcount actions in Europe, with the amounts in 2023 related to Integration 2.0.
Transit Segment operating expenses increased by $10 million primarily from higher SG&A of $7 million and higher Amortization expense of $2 million driven by: •Higher Selling, general and administrative expenses to support higher sales volume•Higher employee compensation and benefit costs•Increased restructuring costs
•Benefits from structured cost actions taken through restructuring actions•The effects of foreign currencyTransit Operating expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 includes $4 million and $1 million, respectively, of restructuring costs, primarily for footprint rationalization and headcount actions in Europe, with the amounts in 2023 related to Integration 2.0.
Liquidity is provided by operating cash flows and borrowings under the Company’s Senior Notes and unsecured credit facility with a consortium of commercial banks. Additionally, the Company utilizes the revolving receivables program and supply chain financing program described below for added flexibility as part of our liquidity management strategy. The following is a summary of selected cash flow information and other relevant data:
Operating activities In the first three months of 2023, cash used for operating activities was $(25) million compared to cash provided by operating activities of $161 million in the first three months of 2022, resulting in a decrease of $186 million. Significant changes to the sources and (uses) of cash causing the decrease include the following:•$25 million attributable to higher Net income and other changes in the related statements of income amounts;•$(196) million from net changes in working capital primarily driven by: $(144) million related to changes in receivables due to timing and volume of sales and the net change in the Revolving Receivables Program, and $(51) million unfavorable change in inventory; •$(72) million from changes in the timing of customer deposits; and,•$52 million from changes to employee related benefit payments. Investing activities In the first three months of 2023 and 2022, cash used for investing activities was $(32) million and $(18) million, respectively. The cash outflow in 2023 was the result of $(32) million in additions to property, plant and equipment for investments in our facilities and manufacturing processes compared with $(20) million in additions to property, plant, and equipment in the first three months of 2022. Financing activities In the first three months of 2023, cash used for financing activities was $(72) million which included $154 million from net changes in debt, $(178) million in stock repurchases, $(31) million of dividend payments, and $(14) million of payments for income tax withholding on share-based compensation. In the first three months of 2022, cash used for financing activities was $(133) million, which included $195 million from net changes in debt, $(296) million in stock repurchases, $(28) million of dividend payments, and $(2) million of payments for income tax withholding on share-based compensation.  As of March 31, 2023, the Company held approximately $417 million of cash and cash equivalents, of which approximately $7 million was held within the United States and approximately $410 million was held outside of the United States, primarily in India, Europe, China, and Brazil. While repatriation of some cash held outside the United States may be restricted by local laws, most of the Company’s foreign cash could be repatriated to the United States net of any tax impacts.We or our affiliates may, from time to time, seek to retire or purchase outstanding debt through negotiated or open-market cash purchases, exchanges, or otherwise, and such transactions, if any, will be upon such terms and at such prices as we may determine, and will depend on prevailing market conditions, our liquidity requirements, contractual restrictions and other factors.
The Company utilizes a revolving receivables facility to sell up to $350 million of certain receivables through our bankruptcy-remote subsidiary to a financial institution on a recurring basis in exchange for cash equal to the gross receivables sold. As customers pay their balances, we transfer additional receivables into the program, which could result in our gross receivables sold being higher or lower than collections reinvested for any applicable periods. Net cash proceeds from the revolving receivables program were $145 million and $155 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Additional information with respect to the Revolving Receivables Program is included in Note 2 of "Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements" included in Part I, Item 1 of this report.
The Company has entered into supply chain financing arrangements with third-party financial institutions to provide our vendors with enhanced payment options while providing the Company with added working capital flexibility. The Company does not provide any guarantees under these arrangements, does not have an economic interest in our supplier's voluntary participation, does not receive an economic benefit from the financial institutions, and no assets are pledged under the arrangements. The arrangements do not change the payable terms negotiated by the Company and our vendors and does not result in a change in the classification of amounts due as Accounts payable in the Condensed Consolidated Balance Sheets. Additional information with respect to the Supply Chain Financing Program is included in Note 2 of "Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements" included in Part I, Item 1 of this report.
The obligations under the Parent Company's US Notes have been fully and unconditionally guaranteed by certain of the Parent Company's U.S. subsidiaries. Each guarantor is 100% owned by the Parent Company, with the exception of GE Transportation, a Wabtec Company, which has 15,000 shares outstanding of Class A Non-Voting Preferred Stock held by General Electric Company. The Euro Notes are issued by Wabtec Transportation Netherlands B.V. ("Wabtec Netherlands") and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Parent Company.The following tables present summarized financial information of the Parent Company and the guarantor subsidiaries on a combined basis. The combined summarized financial information eliminates intercompany balances and transactions among the Parent Company and guarantor subsidiaries and equity in earnings and investments in any guarantor subsidiaries or non-guarantor subsidiaries. The summarized financial information is provided in accordance with the reporting requirements of Rule 13-01 under SEC Regulation S-X for the issuer and guarantor subsidiaries.
The following is a description of the transactions between the combined Parent Company and guarantor subsidiaries with non-guarantor subsidiaries.
The obligations under Wabtec Netherlands’ Euro Notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the Parent Company.  Wabtec Netherlands is a wholly-owned, indirect subsidiary of the Parent Company. Wabtec Netherlands is a holding company and does not have any independent operations.  Its assets consist of its investments in subsidiaries, which are separate and distinct legal entities that are not guarantors of the Euro Notes and have no obligations to pay amounts due under Wabtec Netherlands’ obligations.  The following tables present summarized financial information of Wabtec Netherlands, as the Issuer of the Euro Notes, and the Parent Company, as the parent Guarantor, on a combined basis. The combined summarized financial information eliminates all intercompany balances and transactions among Wabtec Netherlands and the Parent Company as well as all equity in earnings from and investments in any subsidiary of the Parent Company, other than Wabtec Netherlands, which we refer to below as the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.  The summarized financial information is provided in accordance with the reporting requirements of Rule 13-01 under SEC Regulation S-X for the issuer and Parent Company guarantor.
The following is a description of the transactions between the combined Parent Company and Wabtec Netherlands, with the subsidiaries of Westinghouse Air Brake Technologies Corp., other than Wabtec Netherlands, none of which are guarantors of the Euro Notes.
On February 14, 2023, the Board of Directors reauthorized its stock repurchase program to refresh the amount available for stock repurchases to $750 million of the Company’s outstanding shares. This new stock repurchase authorization supersedes the previous authorization of $750 million, of which approximately $232 million remained at the reauthorization date. No time limit was set for the completion of the program which conforms to the requirements under the Restated Credit Agreement and the indentures for the Senior Notes currently outstanding. The Company may repurchase shares in the future at any time, depending upon market conditions, our capital needs and other factors. Purchases of shares may be made by open market purchases or privately negotiated purchases and may be made pursuant to Rule 10b5-1 plan or otherwise. As of March 31, 2023, approximately $663 million was remaining under the stock repurchase plan.
We believe that all statements other than statements of historical facts included in this report, including certain statements under “Business” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” may constitute forward-looking statements. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. Although we believe that our assumptions made in connection with the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot assure that our assumptions and expectations are correct. These forward-looking statements are subject to various risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us, including, among other things:
•changes in general economic and/or industry specific conditions, including the impacts of tax and tariff programs, inflation, supply chain disruptions, foreign currency exchange, and industry consolidation;•prolonged unfavorable economic and industry conditions in the markets served by us, including North America, South America, Europe, Australia, Asia and Africa;•decline in demand for freight cars, locomotives, passenger transit cars, buses and related products and services;•reliance on major original equipment manufacturer customers;•original equipment manufacturers’ program delays;•demand for services in the freight and passenger rail industry;•demand for our products and services;•orders either being delayed, canceled, not returning to historical levels or being reduced, and/or economic conditions affecting the ability of our customers to pay timely for goods and services delivered;•consolidations in the rail industry;•continued outsourcing by our customers; •industry demand for faster and more efficient braking equipment;•fluctuations in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates;•availability of credit or difficulty in obtaining debt or equity financing; or•changes in market consensus as to what attributes are required for projects to be considered "green" or "sustainable" or negative perceptions regarding determinations in such regard with respect to our Green Finance Framework;
•supply disruptions;•technical difficulties;•changes in operating conditions and costs;•increases in raw material costs;•successful introduction of new products;•performance under material long-term contracts;•labor availability and relations;•the outcome of our existing or any future legal proceedings, including litigation involving our principal customers and any litigation with respect to environmental matters, asbestos-related matters, pension liabilities, warranties, product liabilities, competition and anti-trust matters or intellectual property claims;•completion and integration of acquisitions;•the development and use of new technology; or•cybersecurity and data protection risks;
•the actions of competitors; or•the outcome of negotiations with partners, suppliers, customers or others;
•political stability in relevant areas of the world, including the impacts of war and conflicts;•future regulation/deregulation of our customers and/or the rail industry;•levels of governmental funding on transit projects, including for some of our customers;•political developments and laws and regulations, including those related to Positive Train Control; •federal and state income tax legislation; •sanctions imposed on countries and persons; or•the outcome of negotiations with governments;
•impacts of climate change, including evolving climate change policy;•disruptive natural hazards, including earthquakes, fires, floods, tornadoes, hurricanes or weather conditions;•epidemics, pandemics (including the COVID-19 pandemic), or similar public health crises;•deterioration of general economic conditions as a result of natural hazards or health crises;•shutdown of one or more of our operating facilities as a result of natural hazards and health crises; or•supply chain and sourcing disruptions as a result of natural hazards and health crises; Statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q apply only as of the date on which such statements are made, and we undertake no obligation to update any statement to reflect events or circumstances after the date on which the statement is made or to reflect the occurrence of unanticipated events. Reference is also made to the risk factors set forth in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022.
A summary of critical accounting estimates is included in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. In particular, judgment is used in areas such as accounts receivable and the allowance for doubtful accounts, inventories, business combinations, goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles, warranty reserves, income taxes, and revenue recognition. There have been no significant changes in the related accounting policies since December 31, 2022.