
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY   Company Overview26Business Strategy26Key Transactions27 Key Performance Indicators, Trends and Uncertainties28Corporate Governance30 LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES   Sources and Uses of Cash30Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements31Contractual Obligations32Capital Structure32Supplemental Guarantor Information33    RESULTS OF OPERATIONS   Summary33Seniors Housing Operating34Triple-net36Outpatient Medical38Non-Segment/Corporate39    OTHER    Non-GAAP Financial Measures40 Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates46 Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements47
The following discussion and analysis should be read together with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes thereto included in Item 1 of this report. Other important factors are identified in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, including factors identified under the headings “Business,” “Risk Factors,” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations." On March 7, 2022, we announced our intent to complete an UPREIT reorganization. In February 2022, the company formerly known as Welltower Inc. ("Old Welltower") formed WELL Merger Holdco Inc. ("New Welltower") as a wholly owned subsidiary, and New Welltower formed WELL Merger Holdco Sub Inc. ("Merger Sub") as a wholly owned subsidiary. On April 1, 2022, Merger Sub merged with and into Old Welltower, with Old Welltower continuing as the surviving corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of New Welltower (the "Merger"). In connection with the Merger, Old Welltower's name was changed to "Welltower OP Inc.", and New Welltower inherited the name "Welltower Inc." Effective May 24, 2022, Welltower OP Inc. ("Welltower OP") converted from a Delaware corporation into a Delaware limited liability company named Welltower OP LLC (the "LLC Conversion"). Following the LLC Conversion, New Welltower's business continues to be conducted through Welltower OP and New Welltower does not have substantial assets or liabilities, other than through its investment in Welltower OP.Unless stated otherwise or the context otherwise requires, references to "Welltower" mean Welltower Inc. and references to "Welltower OP" mean Welltower OP LLC. References to "we," "us" and "our" mean collectively Welltower, Welltower OP and those entities/subsidiaries owned or controlled by Welltower and/or Welltower OP.
Welltower Inc. (NYSE:WELL), a real estate investment trust ("REIT") and S&P 500 company headquartered in Toledo, Ohio, is driving the transformation of health care infrastructure. Welltower invests with leading seniors housing operators, post-acute providers and health systems to fund the real estate and infrastructure needed to scale innovative care delivery models and improve people’s wellness and overall health care experience. Welltower owns interests in properties concentrated in major, high-growth markets in the United States ("U.S."), Canada and the United Kingdom ("U.K."), consisting of seniors housing and post-acute communities and outpatient medical properties. Welltower is the initial member and majority owner of Welltower OP, with an approximate ownership interest of 99.721% as of March 31, 2023. All of our property ownership, development and related business operations are conducted through Welltower OP and Welltower has no material assets or liabilities other than its investment in Welltower OP. Welltower issues equity from time to time, the net proceeds of which it is obligated to contribute as additional capital to Welltower OP. All debt including credit facilities, senior notes and secured debt is incurred by Welltower OP, and Welltower has fully and unconditionally guaranteed all existing senior unsecured notes.The following table summarizes our consolidated portfolio for the three months ended March 31, 2023 (dollars in thousands):
Our primary objectives are to protect stockholder capital and enhance stockholder value. We seek to pay consistent cash dividends to stockholders and create opportunities to increase dividend payments to stockholders as a result of annual increases in NOI and portfolio growth. To meet these objectives, we invest across the full spectrum of seniors housing and health care real estate and diversify our investment portfolio by property type, relationship and geographic location.Substantially all of our revenues are derived from operating lease rentals, resident fees and services and interest earned on outstanding loans receivable. These items represent our primary sources of liquidity to fund distributions and depend upon the continued ability of our obligors to make contractual rent and interest payments to us and the profitability of our operating properties. To the extent that our obligors/partners experience operating difficulties and become unable to generate sufficient cash to make payments or operating distributions to us, there could be a material adverse impact on our consolidated results of operations, liquidity and/or financial condition. Additionally, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our operations and those of our operators and tenants in the future is uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence.
To mitigate this risk, we monitor our investments through a variety of methods determined by the type of property. Our asset management process for seniors housing properties generally includes review of monthly financial statements and other operating data for each property, review of obligor/partner creditworthiness, property inspections and review of covenant compliance relating to licensure, real estate taxes, letters of credit and other collateral. Our internal property management division manages and monitors the outpatient medical portfolio with a comprehensive process including review of tenant relations, lease expirations, the mix of health service providers, hospital/health system relationships, property performance, capital improvement needs and market conditions among other things. We evaluate the operating environment in each property’s market to determine the likely trend in operating performance of the facility. When we identify unacceptable trends, we seek to mitigate, eliminate or transfer the risk. Through these efforts, we generally aim to intervene at an early stage to address any negative trends, and in so doing, support both the collectability of revenue and the value of our investment.In addition to our asset management and research efforts, we also aim to structure our relevant investments to mitigate payment risk. Operating leases and loans are normally credit enhanced by guarantees and/or letters of credit. In addition, operating leases are typically structured as master leases and loans are generally cross-defaulted and cross-collateralized with other real estate loans, operating leases or agreements between us and the obligor and its affiliates.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, resident fees and services and rental income represented 73% and 25%, respectively, of total revenues. Substantially all of our operating leases are designed with escalating rent structures. Leases with fixed annual rental escalators are generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the initial lease period, subject to a collectability assessment. Rental income related to leases with contingent rental escalators is generally recorded based on the contractual cash rental payments due for the period. Our yield on loans receivable depends upon a number of factors, including the stated interest rate, the average principal amount outstanding during the term of the loan and any interest rate adjustments.Our primary sources of cash include resident fees and services, rent and interest receipts, borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program, public issuances of debt and equity securities, proceeds from investment dispositions and principal payments on loans receivable. Our primary uses of cash include dividend distributions, debt service payments (including principal and interest), real property investments (including acquisitions, capital expenditures, construction advances and transaction costs), loan advances, property operating expenses, general and administrative expenses and other expenses. Depending upon the availability and cost of external capital, we believe our liquidity is sufficient to fund these uses of cash.We also continuously evaluate opportunities to finance future investments. New investments are generally funded from temporary borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program, internally generated cash and the proceeds from investment dispositions. Our investments generate cash from NOI and principal payments on loans receivable. Permanent financing for future investments, which replaces funds drawn under our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program, has historically been provided through a combination of the issuance of public debt and equity securities and the incurrence or assumption of secured debt.Depending upon market conditions, we believe that new investments will be available in the future with spreads over our cost of capital that will generate appropriate returns to our stockholders. It is also likely that investment dispositions may occur in the future. To the extent that investment dispositions exceed new investments, our revenues and cash flows from operations could be adversely affected. We expect to reinvest the proceeds from any investment dispositions in new investments. To the extent that new investment requirements exceed our available cash on-hand, we expect to borrow under our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program. At March 31, 2023, we had $571,902,000 of cash and cash equivalents, $66,894,000 of restricted cash and $4,000,000,000 of available borrowing capacity under our unsecured revolving credit facility.
Capital The following summarizes key capital transactions that occurred during the three months ended March 31, 2023:•During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we, sold 5,603,161 shares of common stock under our ATM Program generating gross proceeds of approximately $413,157,000.•During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we issued $362,900,000 of secured debt at a blended average interest rate of 4.97% and assumed $53,223,000 of secured debt at a blended average interest rate of 3.62%. We extinguished $24,631,000 of secured debt at a blended average interest rate of 4.53%. Investments The following summarizes our property acquisitions and joint venture investments completed during the three months ended March 31, 2023 (dollars in thousands):
Dispositions The following summarizes property dispositions completed during the three months ended March 31, 2023 (dollars in thousands):
Dividends Our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend for the quarter ended March 31, 2023 of $0.61 per share. On May 23, 2023, we will pay our  208th  consecutive quarterly cash dividend to stockholders of record on May 16, 2023.
We utilize several key performance indicators to evaluate the various aspects of our business. These indicators are discussed below and relate to operating performance, credit strength and concentration risk. Management uses these key performance indicators to facilitate internal and external comparisons to our historical operating results, in making operating decisions and for budget planning purposes.Operating Performance We believe that net income and net income attributable to common stockholders (“NICS”) per the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income are the most appropriate earnings measures. Other useful supplemental measures of our operating performance include funds from operations attributable to common stockholders (“FFO”) and consolidated net operating income (“NOI”); however, these supplemental measures are not defined by U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). Please refer to the section entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further discussion and reconciliations. These earnings measures are widely used by investors and analysts in the valuation, comparison and investment recommendations of companies.
The following table reflects the recent historical trends of our operating performance measures for the periods presented (in thousands):
Credit Strength We measure our credit strength both in terms of leverage ratios and coverage ratios. The leverage ratios indicate how much of our balance sheet capitalization is related to long-term debt, net of cash and restricted cash. The coverage ratios indicate our ability to service interest and fixed charges (interest and secured debt principal amortization). We expect to maintain capitalization ratios and coverage ratios sufficient to maintain a capital structure consistent with our current profile. The coverage ratios are based on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”). Please refer to the section entitled “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for further discussion and reconciliation of these measures. Leverage ratios and coverage ratios are widely used by investors, analysts and rating agencies in the valuation, comparison, investment recommendations and rating of companies. The following table reflects the recent historical trends for our credit strength measures for the periods presented:
Concentration Risk We evaluate our concentration risk in terms of NOI by property mix, relationship mix and geographic mix. Concentration risk is a valuable measure in understanding what portion of our NOI could be at risk if certain sectors were to experience downturns. Property mix measures the portion of our NOI that relates to our various property types. Relationship mix measures the portion of our NOI that relates to our current top five relationships. Geographic mix measures the portion of our NOI that relates to our current top five states (or international equivalents). The following table reflects our recent historical trends of concentration risk by NOI for the periods indicated below:
Lease Expirations The following table sets forth information regarding lease expirations for certain portions of our portfolio as of March 31, 2023 (dollars in thousands):
We evaluate our key performance indicators in conjunction with current expectations to determine if historical trends are indicative of future results. Our expected results may not be achieved, and actual results may differ materially from our expectations. Factors that may cause actual results to differ from expected results are described in more detail in “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and other sections of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q. Management regularly monitors economic and other factors to develop strategic and tactical plans designed to improve performance and maximize our competitive position. Our ability to achieve our financial objectives is dependent upon our ability to effectively execute these plans and to appropriately respond to emerging economic and company-specific trends. Please refer to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, under the headings “Business,” “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Maintaining investor confidence and trust is important in today’s business environment. Our Board of Directors and management are strongly committed to policies and procedures that reflect the highest level of ethical business practices. Our corporate governance guidelines provide the framework for our business operations and emphasize our commitment to increase stockholder value while meeting all applicable legal requirements. These guidelines meet the listing standards adopted by the New York Stock Exchange and are available on the Internet at www.welltower.com/investors/governance. The information on our website is not incorporated by reference in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, and our web address is included as an inactive textual reference only.
Our primary sources of cash include resident fees and services, rent and interest receipts, borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program, public issuances of debt and equity securities, proceeds from investment dispositions and principal payments on loans receivable. Our primary uses of cash include dividend distributions, debt service payments (including principal and interest), real property investments (including acquisitions, capital expenditures, construction advances and transaction costs), loan advances, property operating expenses, general and administrative expenses and other expenses. Depending upon the availability and cost of external capital, we believe our liquidity is sufficient to fund these uses of cash. These sources and uses of cash are reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows and are discussed in further detail below.
The following is a summary of our sources and uses of cash flows for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities Please see “Results of Operations” for discussion of net income fluctuations. For the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, cash flows provided from operations exceeded cash distributions to stockholders. Investing Activities The changes in net cash provided from/used in investing activities are primarily attributable to net changes in real property investments and dispositions, loans receivable and investments in unconsolidated entities, which are summarized above in "Key Transactions." Please refer to Notes 3 and 5 of our unaudited consolidated financial statements for additional information. The following is a summary of cash used in non-acquisition capital improvement activities for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The change in new development is primarily due to the number and size of construction projects on-going during the relevant periods. Renovations, redevelopments and other capital improvements include expenditures to maximize property value, increase net operating income, maintain a market-competitive position and/or achieve property stabilization. Financing Activities The changes in net cash provided from/used in financing activities are primarily attributable to changes related to our long-term debt arrangements, the issuances of common stock and dividend payments which are summarized above in "Key Transactions." Please refer to Notes 10, 11 and 14 of our unaudited consolidated financial statements for additional information.In March 2022, we completed the issuance of $550,000,000 senior unsecured notes with a maturity date of June 2032. In April 2022, we closed on an amended $5,200,000,000 unsecured credit facility, increasing our term loan capacity by $500,000,000. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we issued $362,900,000 of secured debt at a blended average interest rate of 4.97% and assumed $53,223,000 of secured debt at a blended average interest rate of 3.62%. As of March 31, 2023, we have total near-term available liquidity of approximately $4.6 billion.
At March 31, 2023, we had investments in unconsolidated entities with our ownership generally ranging from 10% to 88%. We use financial derivative instruments to hedge interest rate and foreign currency exchange rate exposure. At March 31, 2023, we had 22 outstanding letter of credit obligations. Please see Notes 8, 12 and 13 to our unaudited consolidated financial statements for additional information.
The following table summarizes our payment requirements under contractual obligations as of March 31, 2023 (in thousands):
Please refer to “Credit Strength” above for a discussion of our leverage and coverage ratio trends. Our debt agreements contain various covenants, restrictions and events of default. Certain agreements require us to maintain financial ratios and minimum net worth and impose certain limits on our ability to incur indebtedness, create liens and make investments or acquisitions. As of March 31, 2023, we were in compliance in all material respects with the covenants under our debt agreements. None of our debt agreements contain provisions for acceleration which could be triggered by our debt ratings. However, under our primary unsecured credit facility, the ratings on our senior unsecured notes are used to determine the fees and interest charged. We plan to manage the company to maintain compliance with our debt covenants and with a capital structure consistent with our current profile. Any downgrades in terms of ratings or outlook by any or all of the rating agencies could have a material adverse impact on our cost and availability of capital, which could have a material adverse impact on our consolidated results of operations, liquidity and/or financial condition.On April 1, 2022, Welltower and Welltower OP jointly filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) an open-ended automatic or “universal” shelf registration statement on Form S-3 covering an indeterminate amount of future offerings of Welltower’s debt securities, common stock, preferred stock, depositary shares, guarantees of debt securities issued by Welltower OP, warrants and units and Welltower OP’s debt securities and guarantees of debt securities issued by Welltower to replace Old Welltower’s existing “universal” shelf registration statement filed with the SEC on May 4, 2021. On April 1, 2022, Welltower also filed with the SEC a registration statement in connection with its enhanced dividend reinvestment plan (“DRIP”) under which it may issue up to 15,000,000 shares of common stock to replace Old Welltower’s existing DRIP registration statement on Form S-3 filed with the SEC on May 4, 2021. As of April 28, 2023, 15,000,000 shares of common stock remained available for issuance under the DRIP registration statement. On April 4, 2022, Welltower and Welltower OP entered into (i) a second amended and restated equity distribution agreement (the “EDA”) with (i) Robert W. Baird & Co. Incorporated, Barclays Capital Inc., BMO Capital Markets Corp., BNP Paribas Securities Corp., BNY Mellon Capital Markets, LLC, BofA Securities, Inc., BOK Financial Securities, Inc., Capital One Securities Inc., Citigroup Global Markets Inc., Comerica Securities, Inc., Credit Agricole Securities (USA) Inc., Deutsche Bank Securities Inc., Fifth Third Securities, Inc., Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC, Jefferies LLC, JMP Securities LLC, J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, KeyBanc Capital Markets Inc., Loop Capital Markets LLC, Mizuho Securities USA LLC, Morgan Stanley & Co. LLC, MUFG Securities Americas Inc., RBC Capital Markets, LLC, Regions Securities LLC, Scotia Capital (USA) Inc., SMBC Nikko Securities America, Inc., Synovus Securities, Inc., TD Securities (USA) LLC, Truist Securities, Inc. and Wells Fargo Securities, LLC as sales agents and forward
sellers and (ii) the forward purchasers named therein relating to issuances, offers and sales from time to time of up to $3,000,000,000 aggregate amount of common stock of Welltower (together with the existing master forward sale confirmations relating thereto, the “ATM Program”), amending and restating the ATM Program entered into on July 30, 2021 to, among other amendments, increase the total amount of shares of common stock that may be offered and sold under the ATM Program from $2,500,000,000 to $3,000,000,000, which amount excludes shares Old Welltower had previously sold pursuant to the prior program. The ATM Program also allows Welltower to enter into forward sale agreements. As of April 28, 2023, we had $682,342,278 of remaining capacity under the ATM Program and there were no outstanding forward sales agreements. Depending upon market conditions, we anticipate issuing securities under our registration statements to invest in additional properties and to repay borrowings under our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program.In connection with the filing of the new “universal” shelf registration statement, Welltower also filed with the SEC two prospectus supplements that will continue offerings that were previously covered by Old Welltower's prospectus supplements and the accompanying prospectus to the prior registration statement relating to: (i) the registration of up to 620,731 shares of common stock of Welltower (the “DownREIT Shares”), that may be issued from time to time if, and to the extent that, certain holders of Class A units (the “DownREIT Units”) of HCN G&L DownREIT, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “DownREIT”), tender such DownREIT Units for redemption by the DownREIT, and HCN DownREIT Member, LLC, a majority-owned indirect subsidiary of Welltower (including its permitted successors and assigns, the “Managing Member”), or a designated affiliate of the Managing Member, elects to assume the redemption obligations of the DownREIT and to satisfy all or a portion of the redemption consideration by issuing DownREIT Shares to the holders instead of or in addition to paying a cash amount; and (ii) the registration of up to 475,327 shares of common stock of Welltower Inc. (the “DownREIT II Shares”), that may be issued from time to time if, and to the extent that, certain holders of Class A units (the “DownREIT II Units,” and collectively with the DownREIT Units, the “Units”) of HCN G&L DownREIT II LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “DownREIT II”), tender such DownREIT II Units for redemption by the DownREIT II, and the Managing Member, or a designated affiliate of the Managing Member, elects to assume the redemption obligations of the DownREIT II and to satisfy all or a portion of the redemption consideration by issuing DownREIT II Shares to the holders instead of or in addition to paying a cash amount. On July 22, 2022, Welltower filed with the SEC a prospectus supplement relating to the registration of up to 300,026 shares of common stock of Welltower Inc. that may be issued from time to time if, and to the extent that, certain holders of Class A Common Units (the "OP Units") of Welltower OP tender the OP Units for redemption by Welltower OP, and Welltower Inc. elects to assume the redemption obligations of Welltower OP and to satisfy all or a portion of the redemption consideration by issuing shares of its common stock to the holders instead of or in addition to paying a cash amount.
Welltower OP has issued the unsecured notes described in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. All unsecured notes are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by Welltower, and Welltower OP is 99.721% owned by Welltower as of March 31, 2023. Effective January 4, 2021, the SEC adopted amendments to the financial disclosure requirements applicable to registered debt offerings that include certain credit enhancements. The Company has adopted these new rules, which permits subsidiary issuers of obligations guaranteed by the parent to omit separate financial statements if the consolidated financial statements of the parent company have been filed, the subsidiary obligor is a consolidated subsidiary of the parent company, the guaranteed security is debt or debt-like, and the security is guaranteed fully and unconditionally by the parent. Accordingly, separate consolidated financial statements of Welltower OP have not been presented. Furthermore, Welltower and Welltower OP have no material assets, liabilities, or operations other than financing activities and their investments in non-guarantor subsidiaries. Therefore, we meet the criteria in Rule 13-01 of Regulation S-X to omit the summarized financial information from our disclosures.
Our primary sources of revenue include resident fees and services, rent and interest income. Our primary expenses include property operating expenses, depreciation and amortization, interest expense, general and administrative expenses and other expenses. We evaluate our business and make resource allocations on our three business segments: Seniors Housing Operating, Triple-net and Outpatient Medical. The primary performance measures for our properties are NOI and same store NOI ("SSNOI"), and other supplemental measures include Funds From Operations ("FFO") and EBITDA, which are further discussed below. Please see "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below for additional information and reconciliations. The following is a summary of our results of operations (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
The following is a summary of our results of operations for the Seniors Housing Operating segment (dollars in thousands):
Resident fees and services and property operating expenses increased for the three month periods ended March 31, 2023 compared to the same period in the prior year primarily due to acquisitions outpacing dispositions during 2022 and year to date 2023. Additionally, our Seniors Housing Operating revenues are dependent on occupancy and rate growth, both of which have continued to increase since the same period in the prior year. Average occupancy is as follows:
(1) Average occupancy includes our minority ownership share related to unconsolidated properties and excludes the minority partners' noncontrolling ownership share related to consolidated properties. Also excludes land parcels and properties under development.
The following is a summary of our SSNOI at Welltower's share for the Seniors Housing Operating segment (dollars in thousands):QTD Pool Three Months EndedChange March 31, 2023March 31, 2022$%SSNOI (1)$211,306 $177,089 $34,217 19.3 %
(1) For the QTD Pool, amounts relate to 746 same store properties. Please see "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below for additional information and reconciliations. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we recorded impairment charges of $12,252,000 related to three held for sale properties  for which the carrying values exceeded the estimated fair value less costs to sell and $377,000 related to one held for use property for which the carrying value exceeded the estimated fair value. No impairment was recorded during the same period in 2022. Transaction costs related to asset acquisitions are capitalized as a component of the purchase price. The fluctuation in other expenses is primarily due to the timing of noncapitalizable transaction costs associated with acquisitions and operator transitions. Changes in the gain on sales of properties are related to the volume and timing of property sales and the sales prices. Depreciation and amortization fluctuates as a result of acquisitions, dispositions and transitions. To the extent that we acquire or dispose of additional properties in the future, these amounts will change accordingly. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we completed one conversion representing $26,711,667 or $193,563 per unit. The following is a summary of our Seniors Housing Operating construction projects in process, excluding expansions (dollars in thousands):
Interest expense represents secured debt interest expense, which fluctuates based on the net effect and timing of assumptions, segment transitions, fluctuations in foreign currency rates, extinguishments and principal amortizations. The fluctuations in loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt is primarily attributable to the volume of extinguishments and terms of the related secured debt. The following is a summary of our Seniors Housing Operating segment property secured debt principal activity (dollars in thousands):
The majority of our Seniors Housing Operating properties are formed through partnership interests. Income or loss from unconsolidated entities represents our share of net income or losses from partnerships where we are the noncontrolling partner. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests represents our partners’ share of net income (loss) related to joint ventures.
The following is a summary of our results of operations for the Triple-net segment (dollars in thousands):
Certain of our leases contain annual rental escalators that are contingent upon changes in the Consumer Price Index and/or changes in the gross operating revenues of the tenant’s properties. These escalators are not fixed, so no straight-line rent is recorded; however, rental income is recorded based on the contractual cash rental payments due for the period. If gross operating revenues at our facilities and/or the Consumer Price Index do not increase, a portion of our revenues may not continue to increase. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, we had 23 leases with rental rate increases ranging from 0.58% to 43.39% in our Triple-net portfolio. The following is a summary of our SSNOI at Welltower's share for the Triple-net segment (dollars in thousands):QTD Pool Three Months EndedChange March 31, 2023March 31, 2022$%SSNOI (1)$117,716 $116,780 $936 0.8 %(1) For the QTD Pool, amounts relate to 415 same store properties. Please see "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below for additional information and reconciliations.  Depreciation and amortization fluctuates as a result of the acquisitions, dispositions and segment transitions of Triple-net properties. To the extent we acquire or dispose of additional properties in the future, our provision for depreciation and amortization will change accordingly. Transaction costs related to asset acquisitions are capitalized as a component of purchase price. The fluctuation in other expenses is primarily due to noncapitalizable transaction costs from acquisitions and segment transitions. Changes in the gain on sales of properties are related to the volume and timing of property sales and the sales prices.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, there were no Triple-net construction projects completed. The following is a summary of our consolidated Triple-net construction projects in process, excluding expansions (dollars in thousands):
During the three months ended March 31, 2022, loss (gain) on derivatives and financial instruments, net is primarily attributable to the mark-to-market of the equity warrants received as part of the Safanad/HC-One transaction that closed in the second quarter of 2021. In addition, the mark-to-market adjustment on our Genesis HealthCare available-for-sale investment is reflected in all periods.Interest expense represents secured debt interest expense and related fees. The change in secured debt interest expense is due to the net effect and timing of assumptions, segment transitions, fluctuations in foreign currency rates, extinguishments and principal amortizations. The following is a summary of our Triple-net secured debt principal activity for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
A portion of our Triple-net properties were formed through partnerships. Income or loss from unconsolidated entities represents our share of net income or losses from partnerships where we are the noncontrolling partner. The decrease in income from unconsolidated entities is primarily related to the restructure of an unconsolidated joint venture into a consolidated structure. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests represents our partners’ share of net income relating to those partnerships where we are the controlling partner.
The following is a summary of our results of operations for the Outpatient Medical segment for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Rental income has increased due primarily to acquisitions and construction conversions that occurred during 2022 and the year to date in 2023. Certain of our leases contain annual rental escalators that are contingent upon changes in the Consumer Price Index. These escalators are not fixed, so no straight-line rent is recorded; however, rental income is recorded based on the contractual cash rental payments due for the period. If the Consumer Price Index does not increase, a portion of our revenues may not continue to increase. Our leases could renew above or below current rental rates, resulting in an increase or decrease in rental income. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, our consolidated outpatient medical portfolio signed 80,010 square feet of new leases and 539,121 square feet of renewals. The weighted-average term of these leases was seven years, with a rate of $32.21 per square foot and tenant improvement and lease commission costs of $13.81 per square foot. Substantially all of these leases contain an annual fixed or contingent escalation rent structure ranging from 1.0% to 9.0%. The fluctuations in property operating expenses and depreciation and amortization are primarily attributable to acquisitions and construction conversions that occurred during 2022 and year to date in 2023. To the extent that we acquire or dispose of additional properties in the future, these amounts will change accordingly.The following is a summary of our SSNOI at Welltower's share for the Outpatient Medical segment (dollars in thousands):QTD Pool Three Months EndedChange March 31, 2023March 31, 2022$%SSNOI (1)$110,423 $108,347 $2,076 1.9 %(1) For the QTD Pool, amounts relate to 371 same store properties. Please see "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below for additional information and reconciliations. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we completed one conversion representing $9,351,000 or $555 per square foot. The following is a summary of the consolidated Outpatient Medical construction projects in process, excluding expansions (dollars in thousands):
Total interest expense represents secured debt interest expense. The change in secured debt interest expense is primarily due to the net effect and timing of assumptions, extinguishments and principal amortizations. The following is a summary of our Outpatient Medical secured debt principal activity (dollars in thousands):
A portion of our Outpatient Medical properties were formed through partnerships. Income or loss from unconsolidated entities represents our share of net income or losses from partnerships where we are the noncontrolling partner. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests represents our partners’ share of net income or loss relating to those partnerships where we are the controlling partner.
The following is a summary of our results of operations for the Non-Segment/Corporate activities for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
Property operating expenses represent insurance costs related to our captive insurance company, which acts as a direct insurer of property level insurance coverage for our portfolio.
The following is a summary of our Non-Segment/Corporate interest expense for the periods presented (dollars in thousands):
The change in interest expense on senior unsecured notes is due to the net effect of issuances and extinguishments, as well as the movement in foreign exchange rates and related hedge activity. Please refer to Note 11 for additional information. The change in interest expense on our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program is due primarily to the net effect and timing of draws, paydowns and variable interest rate changes. Please refer to Note 10 for additional information regarding our unsecured revolving credit facility and commercial paper program. Loan expenses represent the amortization of costs incurred in connection with senior unsecured notes issuances. General and administrative expenses as a percentage of consolidated revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 were 2.84% and 2.70%, respectively. The provision for income taxes primarily relates to state taxes, foreign taxes and taxes based on income generated by entities that are structured as TRSs.
We believe that net income and net income attributable to common stockholders, as defined by U.S. GAAP, are the most appropriate earnings measurements. However, we consider FFO, NOI, SSNOI, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to be useful supplemental measures of our operating performance. Historical cost accounting for real estate assets in accordance with U.S. GAAP implicitly assumes that the value of real estate assets diminishes predictably over time as evidenced by the provision for depreciation. However, since real estate values have historically risen or fallen with market conditions, many industry investors and analysts have considered presentations of operating results for real estate companies that use historical cost accounting to be insufficient. In response, the National Association of Real Estate Investment Trusts (“NAREIT”) created funds from operations attributable to common stockholders (“FFO”) as a supplemental measure of operating performance for REITs that excludes historical cost depreciation from net income. FFO, as defined by NAREIT, means NICS, computed in accordance with U.S. GAAP, excluding gains (or losses) from sales of real estate and impairment of depreciable assets, plus depreciation and amortization, and after adjustments for unconsolidated entities and noncontrolling interests.NOI is used to evaluate the operating performance of our properties. We define NOI as total revenues, including tenant reimbursements, less property operating expenses. Property operating expenses represent costs associated with managing, maintaining and servicing tenants for our properties. These expenses include, but are not limited to, property-related payroll and benefits, property management fees paid to operators, marketing, housekeeping, food service, maintenance, utilities, property taxes and insurance. General and administrative expenses represent general overhead costs that are unrelated to property operations and unallocable to the properties. These expenses include, but are not limited to, payroll and benefits related to corporate employees, professional services, office expenses and depreciation of corporate fixed assets. Same store NOI (“SSNOI”) is used to evaluate the operating performance of our properties using a consistent population which controls for changes in the composition of our portfolio. We believe the drivers of property level NOI for both consolidated properties and unconsolidated properties are generally the same and therefore, we evaluate SSNOI based on our ownership interest in each property ("Welltower Share"). To arrive at Welltower's Share, NOI is adjusted by adding our minority ownership share related to unconsolidated properties and by subtracting the minority partners' noncontrolling ownership interests for consolidated properties. We do not control investments in unconsolidated properties and while we consider disclosures at Welltower Share to be useful, they may not accurately depict the legal and economic implications of our joint venture arrangements and should be used with caution. As used herein, same store is generally defined as those revenue-generating properties in the portfolio for the relevant year-over-year reporting periods. Acquisitions and development conversions are included in SSNOI five full quarters after acquisition or being placed into service for the QTD Pool. Land parcels, loans and sub-leases, as well as any properties sold or classified as held for sale during the respective periods are excluded from SSNOI. Redeveloped properties (including major refurbishments of a Seniors Housing Operating property where 20% or more of units are simultaneously taken out of commission for 30 days or more or Outpatient Medical properties undergoing a change in intended use) are excluded from SSNOI until five full quarters post completion of the redevelopment for the QTD Pool. Properties undergoing operator transitions and/or segment transitions are also excluded from SSNOI until five full quarters post completion of the transition for the QTD Pool. In addition, properties significantly impacted by force majeure, acts of God, or other extraordinary adverse events are excluded from SSNOI until five full quarters after the properties are placed back into service for the QTD Pool.
SSNOI excludes non-cash NOI and includes adjustments to present consistent ownership percentages and to translate Canadian properties and U.K. properties using a consistent exchange rate. We believe NOI and SSNOI provide investors relevant and useful information because they measure the operating performance of our properties at the property level on an unleveraged basis. We use NOI and SSNOI to make decisions about resource allocations and to assess the property level performance of our properties.EBITDA is defined as earnings (net income) before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as EBITDA excluding unconsolidated entities and including adjustments for stock-based compensation expense, provision for loan losses, gains/losses on extinguishment of debt, gains/loss/impairments on properties, gains/losses on derivatives and financial instruments, other expenses, other impairment charges and other adjustments as deemed appropriate. We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, along with net income, are important supplemental measures because they provide additional information to assess and evaluate the performance of our operations. We primarily use these measures to determine our interest coverage ratio, which represents EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA divided by total interest, and our fixed charge coverage ratio, which represents EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA divided by fixed charges. Fixed charges include total interest and secured debt principal amortization. Covenants in our unsecured senior notes and primary credit facility contain financial ratios based on a definition of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA that is specific to those agreements. Our leverage ratios are defined as the proportion of net debt to total capitalization and include book capitalization, undepreciated book capitalization and market capitalization. Book capitalization represents the sum of net debt (defined as total long-term debt, excluding operating lease liabilities, less cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash), total equity and redeemable noncontrolling interests. Undepreciated book capitalization represents book capitalization adjusted for accumulated depreciation and amortization. Market capitalization represents book capitalization adjusted for the fair market value of our common stock. Our supplemental reporting measures and similarly entitled financial measures are widely used by investors, equity and debt analysts and rating agencies in the valuation, comparison, rating and investment recommendations of companies. Management uses these financial measures to facilitate internal and external comparisons to our historical operating results and in making operating decisions. Additionally, these measures are utilized by the Board of Directors to evaluate management. None of our supplemental measures represent net income or cash flow provided from operating activities as determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP and should not be considered as alternative measures of profitability or liquidity. Finally, the supplemental measures, as defined by us, may not be comparable to similarly entitled items reported by other real estate investment trusts or other companies.The table below reflects the reconciliation of FFO to NICS, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for the periods presented. Noncontrolling interest and unconsolidated entity amounts represent adjustments to reflect our share of depreciation and amortization, gains/loss on real estate dispositions and impairment of assets. Amounts are in thousands except for per share data.
The table below reflects the reconciliation of consolidated NOI to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for the periods presented. Dollar amounts are in thousands.
The following is a reconciliation of the properties included in our QTD Pool for SSNOI:
The following is a reconciliation of our consolidated NOI to same store NOI for the periods presented for the respective pools. Dollar amounts are in thousands.
The tables below reflects the reconciliation of EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for the periods presented. Dollars are in thousands.
The table below reflects the reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for the periods presented. Dollars are in thousands.
Our leverage ratios include book capitalization, undepreciated book capitalization and market capitalization. Book capitalization represents the sum of net debt (defined as total long-term debt less cash and cash equivalents and restricted cash), total equity and redeemable noncontrolling interests. Undepreciated book capitalization represents book capitalization adjusted for accumulated depreciation and amortization. Market capitalization represents book capitalization adjusted for the fair market value of our common stock. Our leverage ratios are defined as the proportion of net debt to total capitalization.
The table below reflects the reconciliation of our leverage ratios to our balance sheets for the periods presented. Amounts are in thousands, except share price.
Our unaudited consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions. Management considers an accounting estimate or assumption critical if:•the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change; and•the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material.Management has discussed the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Management believes the current assumptions and other considerations used to estimate amounts reflected in our unaudited consolidated financial statements are appropriate and are not reasonably likely to change in the future. However, since these estimates require assumptions to be made that were uncertain at the time the estimate was made, they bear the risk of change. If actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used in estimating amounts reflected in our unaudited consolidated financial statements, the resulting changes could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated results of operations, liquidity and/or financial condition. Please refer to Note 2 to our financial statements included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 for further information on significant accounting policies that impact us. There have been no material changes to these policies in 2023.
This Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q may contain “forward-looking statements” as defined in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. When Welltower uses words such as “may,” “will,” “intend,” “should,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “project,” “pro forma,” “estimate” or similar expressions that do not relate solely to historical matters, Welltower is making forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks and uncertainties that may cause Welltower’s actual results to differ materially from Welltower’s expectations discussed in the forward-looking statements. This may be a result of various factors, including, but not limited to: the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic; the status of the economy; the status of capital markets, including availability and cost of capital; issues facing the health care industry, including compliance with, and changes to, regulations and payment policies, responding to government investigations and punitive settlements and operators’/tenants’ difficulty in cost effectively obtaining and maintaining adequate liability and other insurance; changes in financing terms; competition within the health care and seniors housing industries; negative developments in the operating results or financial condition of operators/tenants, including, but not limited to, their ability to pay rent and repay loans; Welltower’s ability to transition or sell properties with profitable results; the failure to make new investments or acquisitions as and when anticipated; natural disasters and other acts of God affecting Welltower’s properties; Welltower’s ability to re-lease space at similar rates as vacancies occur; Welltower’s ability to timely reinvest sale proceeds at similar rates to assets sold; operator/tenant or joint venture partner bankruptcies or insolvencies; the cooperation of joint venture partners; government regulations affecting Medicare and Medicaid reimbursement rates and operational requirements; liability or contract claims by or against operators/tenants; unanticipated difficulties and/or expenditures relating to future investments or acquisitions; environmental laws affecting Welltower’s properties; changes in rules or practices governing Welltower’s financial reporting; the movement of U.S. and foreign currency exchange rates; Welltower’s ability to maintain its qualification as a REIT; key management personnel recruitment and retention; and other risks described in Welltower’s reports filed from time to time with the SEC. Other important factors are identified in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022, including factors identified under the headings “Business,” “Risk Factors” and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.” Finally, Welltower undertakes no obligation to update or revise publicly any forward-looking statements, whether because of new information, future events or otherwise, or to update the reasons why actual results could differ from those projected in any forward-looking statements.