
The following discussion is intended to further the reader’s understanding of the consolidated financial condition and results of operations of our Company. It should be read in conjunction with our condensed consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes elsewhere in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q (“Form 10-Q”) as well as Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations and the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in our 2022 Annual Report. Our historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains a number of forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks discussed in Part I, Item 1A of our 2022 Annual Report and in Part II, Item 1A of this Form 10-Q.
For the purpose of aiding the comparison of our year-over-year results, we may refer to net sales and other financial results excluding the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. Organic net sales exclude the impact from acquisitions and/or divestitures and translate the current-period reported sales of subsidiaries whose functional currency is other than USD at the applicable foreign exchange rates in effect during the comparable prior-year period. We may also refer to adjusted consolidated operating profit and adjusted consolidated operating profit margin, which exclude the effects of unallocated items. The unallocated items are not representative of ongoing operations, and generally include restructuring and related charges, certain asset impairments, and other specifically-identified income or expense items. The re-measured results excluding effects from currency translation, the impact from acquisitions and/or divestitures, and excluding the effects of unallocated items are not in conformity with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles ("GAAP") and should not be used as a substitute for the comparable U.S. GAAP financial measures. The non-U.S. GAAP financial measures are incorporated in our discussion and analysis as management uses them in evaluating our results of operations and believes that this information provides users with a valuable insight into our overall performance and financial position.
We are a leading global manufacturer in the design and production of technologically advanced, high-quality, integrated containment and delivery systems for injectable drugs and healthcare products. Our products include a variety of primary proprietary packaging, containment solutions, reconstitution and transfer systems, and drug delivery systems, as well as contract manufacturing, analytical lab services and integrated solutions. Our customers include leading biologic, generic, pharmaceutical, diagnostic, and medical device companies around the world. Our top priority is delivering quality products that meet the exact product specifications and quality standards customers require and expect. This focus on quality includes a commitment to excellence in manufacturing, scientific and technical expertise and management, which enables us to partner with our customers in order to deliver safe, effective drug products to patients quickly and efficiently.Our business operations are organized into two global segments, Proprietary Products and Contract-Manufactured Products. Our Proprietary Products reportable segment offers proprietary packaging, containment solutions and drug delivery systems, along with analytical lab services and other integrated services and solutions, primarily to biologic, generic and pharmaceutical drug customers. Our Contract-Manufactured Products reportable segment serves as a fully integrated business, focused on the design, manufacture, and automated assembly of complex devices, primarily for pharmaceutical, diagnostic, and medical device customers. We also maintain collaborations to share technologies and market products with affiliates in Japan and Mexico.
Through the three months ended March 31, 2023, the war between Russia and Ukraine has not had a material impact on the Company’s business, financial condition or results of operations as we do not have manufacturing operations or significant commercial relationships in either country. However, the continuation of the Russia-Ukraine military conflict and/or an escalation of the conflict beyond its current scope may further weaken the global economy and could result in additional inflationary pressures and supply chain constraints, including the unavailability and cost of energy. During three months ended March 31, 2023 we continued to experience high costs for raw materials in both domestic and international markets. Due to the uncertainty that exists relative to the duration and overall impact of the macroeconomic factors discussed above, our future operating performance, particularly in the short-term, may be subject to volatility. The impacts of macroeconomic conditions on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash flows are dependent on certain factors, including those discussed in Item 1A. Risk Factors and the risk factors described in Part I, Item 1A of our 2022 Annual Report.
The following tables present a reconciliation from U.S. GAAP to non-U.S. GAAP financial measures:
During the first quarter 2023, we recorded a tax benefit of $11.6 million associated with stock-based compensation.
During the first quarter 2022, we recorded a tax benefit of $8.9 million associated with stock-based compensation.(1)During the three months ended March 31, 2023, in preparation for the sale of one of the Company’s manufacturing facilities within the Proprietary Products segment, the Company recorded an impairment expense of $9.4 million within other expense (income) and a corresponding reduction to the disposal group net assets to its fair value less cost to sell. The transaction is expected to close during the second quarter of 2023.  (2)During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, the Company recorded $0.2 million of amortization expense within operating profit associated with an intangible asset acquired during the second quarter of 2020. During the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, the Company recorded $0.5 million of amortization expense in association with an acquisition of increased ownership interest in Daikyo.(3)The Company recorded a pension settlement charge within other nonoperating (income) expense, as it determined that normal-course lump-sum payments for our U.S. qualified defined benefit pension plan exceeded the threshold for settlement accounting.
We evaluate the performance of our segments based upon, among other things, segment net sales and operating profit. Segment operating profit excludes general corporate costs, which include executive and director compensation, stock-based compensation, certain pension and other retirement benefit costs, and other corporate facilities and administrative expenses not allocated to the segments. Also excluded are items that we consider not representative of ongoing operations. Such items are referred to as other unallocated items for which further information can be found above in the reconciliation from U.S. GAAP to non-U.S. GAAP financial measures.Percentages in the following tables and throughout the Results of Operations section may reflect rounding adjustments.
The following table presents net sales, consolidated and by reportable segment, for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022:
Consolidated net sales decreased by $3.4 million, or 0.5%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $20.1 million. Excluding foreign currency translation effects, consolidated net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $16.7 million, or 2.3%, as compared to the same period in 2022.Proprietary Products – Proprietary Products net sales decreased by $18.2 million, or 3.0%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $17.8 million. Excluding foreign currency translation effects, net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 decreased by $0.4 million, or 0.1%, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to  a decline in COVID-related sales of approximately $88 million, offset by sales price increases.Contract-Manufactured Products – Contract-Manufactured Products net sales increased by $14.8 million, or 12.5%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $2.3 million. Excluding foreign currency translation effects, net sales for the three months ended March 31, 2023 increased by $17.1 million, or 14.4%, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to an increase in sales of components associated with injection-related devices and sales price increases.
The intersegment sales elimination, which is required for the presentation of consolidated net sales, represents the elimination of components sold between our segments.
The following table presents gross profit and related gross profit margins, consolidated and by reportable segment:
Consolidated gross profit decreased by $13.3 million, or 4.7%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $6.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022. Consolidated gross profit margin decreased by 1.6 margin points for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022.Proprietary Products - Proprietary Products gross profit decreased by $12.9 million, or 4.9%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $6.2 million. Proprietary Products gross profit margin decreased by 0.9 margin points for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same periods in 2022, due to a decline in higher margin COVID-related sales, inflationary pressures primarily within transportation and compensation costs, and additional plant spend to meet ongoing product demand. These headwinds were partially offset by increased sales prices and production efficiencies.Contract-Manufactured Products - Contract-Manufactured Products gross profit decreased by $0.4 million, or 1.7%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $0.5 million. Contract-Manufactured Products gross profit margin decreased by 2.5 margin points for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, due to inflationary pressures primarily within transportation and compensation costs and unfavorable mix of product sold. These headwinds were partially offset by increased sales prices.
The following table presents consolidated R&D costs:
Consolidated R&D costs increased by $2.5 million, or 17.1%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, due to additional research performed to identify new product opportunities, of which $1.5 million of the increase relates to research performed on glass systems. Efforts remain focused on the continued investment in elastomeric packaging components, formulation development, drug containment systems, self-injection systems and drug administration consumables.All of the R&D costs incurred during the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 related to Proprietary Products.
The following table presents SG&A costs, consolidated and by reportable segment and corporate and unallocated items:
Consolidated SG&A costs increased by $2.6 million, or 3.1%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, due to an increase in compensation costs, offset by a decrease in costs related to professional services and a favorable foreign currency translation impact of $0.7 million.Proprietary Products - Proprietary Products SG&A costs increased by $0.6 million, or 1.1%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022. Proprietary Products SG&A costs increased primarily due to an increase in compensation costs, offset by a decrease in costs related to professional services, other discretionary spending and a favorable foreign currency translation impact of $0.6 million.Contract-Manufactured Products - Contract-Manufactured Products SG&A costs increased by $1.2 million, or 25.0% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to a higher allocation of corporate function spend.Corporate and unallocated items - Corporate SG&A costs increased by $0.8 million, or 3.5%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to an increase in mark-to-market expense related to stock-based compensation, offset by a decrease in costs related to professional services.
The following table presents other income and expense items, consolidated and by reportable segment, corporate and unallocated items:
Other expense and income items consist of foreign exchange transaction gains and losses, gains and losses on the sale of fixed assets, contingent consideration, fixed asset impairments and miscellaneous income and charges. Consolidated other expense (income) changed by $16.0 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, due to the factors described below. Proprietary Products - Proprietary Products other expense (income) changed by $6.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to a $0.6 million loss related to oil hedges recorded during the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared to a gain of $2.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. Additionally, a loss of $0.9 million on foreign exchange transactions was recorded in the three months ended March 31, 2023, while a gain of $1.1 million was recorded in the same period in 2022. Lastly, fixed asset impairments totaled $1.9 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, while a gain on the sale of equipment of $0.1 million was recorded in the same period in 2022.Contract-Manufactured Products - Contract-Manufactured Products other expense (income) changed by $0.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022.Corporate and unallocated items - Corporate and unallocated items changed by $9.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same periods in 2022. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, in preparation for the sale of one of the Company’s manufacturing facilities within the Proprietary Products segment, the Company recorded an impairment expense of $9.4 million within other expense (income) and a corresponding reduction to the disposal group net assets to its fair value less cost to sell. The transaction is expected to close during the second quarter of 2023.
The following table presents operating profit and adjusted operating profit, consolidated and by reportable segment, corporate and unallocated items:
Consolidated operating profit decreased by $34.4 million, or 18.1%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $5.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022.Proprietary Products - Proprietary Products operating profit decreased by $22.7 million, or 11.7%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $5.3 million, due to the factors described above, most notably the decline in COVID-related sales.Contract-Manufactured Products - Contract-Manufactured Products operating profit decreased by $1.7 million, or 8.9%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, including an unfavorable foreign currency translation impact of $0.5 million, due to the factors described above, most notably increased overhead costs that were driven by inflation.Corporate - Excluding the unallocated items, Corporate costs increased by $0.6 million, or 2.7%, for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, due to the factors described above.Unallocated items - Please refer to the Financial Performance Summary section above for details.
The following table presents interest expense, net, by significant component:
Interest expense, net, remained flat for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022.Interest income increased by $4.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, resulting from higher interest rates compared to the prior year, primarily within the US, Europe and South America.
The provision for income taxes was $23.6 million and $21.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and the effective tax rate was 14.9% and 11.3%, respectively. The increase in the effective tax rate is primarily due to a shift in the geographic earnings mix and a $5.9 million tax benefit recorded as a result of a state tax valuation allowance reversal in the three months ended March 31, 2022 that was not repeated in 2023. This was offset by an increase in the tax benefit related to stock-based compensation for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022.
Equity in net income of affiliated companies decreased by $1.5 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, due to less favorable operating results at Daikyo and the Mexico affiliates.
The following table presents cash flow data for the three months ended March 31:
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities – Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $13.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to a decline in operating results.Net Cash Used in Investing Activities – Net cash used in investing activities increased by $13.8 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to an increase in capital expenditures for additional manufacturing capacity in 2023 to meet customer demand.Net Cash Used in Financing Activities – Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $101.7 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, as compared to the same period in 2022, primarily due to decreases in purchases under our share repurchase program in 2023.
The table below presents selected liquidity and capital measures:
Cash and cash equivalents include all instruments that have maturities of ninety days or less when purchased. Working capital is defined as current assets less current liabilities. Cash and cash equivalents – Our cash and cash equivalents balance at March 31, 2023 consisted of cash held in depository accounts with banks around the world and cash invested in high-quality, short-term investments. The cash and cash equivalents balance at March 31, 2023 included $244.4 million of cash held by subsidiaries within the U.S., and $641.9 million of cash held by subsidiaries outside of the U.S. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we purchased 183,360 shares of our common stock under our calendar-year 2023 share repurchase program at a cost of $60.1 million, or an average price of $327.90 per share.Working capital – Working capital at March 31, 2023 increased by $1.8 million, or 0.1%, as compared to December 31, 2022, which includes a favorable foreign currency translation impact of $8.1 million. Excluding the impact of currency exchange rates, cash and cash equivalents decreased by $15.0 million, while accounts receivable, inventories and total current liabilities increased by $2.5 million, $29.7 million and $11.9 million, respectively. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents was due to capital expenditures and share repurchases, offset by positive operating results during the three months ended March 31, 2023. The increase in inventories that occurred during the period was to ensure we have sufficient inventory on hand to support the needs of our customers. The increase in total current liabilities was caused an increase in accounts payable and income taxes payable during the three months ended March 31, 2023.Debt and credit facilities – The $0.6 million decrease in total debt at March 31, 2023, as compared to December 31, 2022, resulted from debt repayments under our Term Loan.Our sources of liquidity include our Credit Facility. At March 31, 2023, we had no outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility. At March 31, 2023, the borrowing capacity available under the Credit Facility, including outstanding letters of credit of $2.4 million, was $497.6 million. We do not expect any significant limitations on our ability to access this source of funds.Pursuant to the financial covenants in our debt agreements, we are required to maintain established interest coverage ratios and not to exceed established leverage ratios. In addition, the agreements contain other customary covenants, none of which we consider restrictive to our operations. At March 31, 2023, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenants.We believe that cash on hand and cash generated from operations, together with availability under our Credit Facility, will be adequate to address our foreseeable liquidity needs based on our current expectations of our business operations, capital expenditures and scheduled payments of debt obligations.
A summary of future material cash payments resulting from commitments and contractual obligations was provided in our 2022 Annual Report. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, there were no material changes outside of the ordinary course of business to our commitments and contractual obligations.
At March 31, 2023, we had no off-balance sheet financing arrangements other than unconditional purchase obligations incurred in the ordinary course of business and outstanding letters of credit related to various insurance programs, as noted in our 2022 Annual Report.
There have been no changes to the Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates disclosed in Part II, Item 7 of our 2022 Annual Report.
For information on new accounting standards that were adopted during the three months ended March 31, 2023, and the impact, if any, on our financial position or results of operations, see Note 2, New Accounting Standards.
Our disclosure and analysis in this Form 10-Q contains some forward-looking statements that are based on management’s beliefs and assumptions, current expectations, estimates and forecasts. We also provide forward-looking statements in other materials we release to the public, as well as oral forward-looking statements. Such statements provide our current expectations or forecasts of future events. They do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. We have attempted, wherever possible, to identify forward-looking statements by using words such as “plan,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “will,” “estimate,” “continue” and other words of similar meaning in conjunction with, among other things, discussions of future operations and financial performance, as well as our strategy for growth, product development, market position and expenditures. All statements that address operating performance or events or developments that we expect or anticipate will occur in the future - including statements relating to sales and earnings per share growth, cash flows or uses, and statements expressing views about future operating results - are forward-looking statements.Forward-looking statements are based on current expectations of future events. The forward-looking statements are, and will be, based on management’s then-current views and assumptions regarding future events and operating performance, and speak only as of their dates. Investors should realize that, if underlying assumptions prove inaccurate or unknown risks or uncertainties materialize, actual results could vary materially from our expectations and projections. Investors are therefore cautioned not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements.The following are some important factors that could cause our actual results to differ from our expectations in any forward-looking statements: •sales demand and our ability to meet that demand;•competition from other providers in our businesses, including customers’ in-house operations, and from lower-cost producers in emerging markets, which can impact unit volume, price and profitability;•customers’ changing inventory requirements and manufacturing plans that alter existing orders or ordering patterns for the products we supply to them;•interruptions or weaknesses in our supply chain, including from reasons beyond our control such as extreme weather, longer-term climate changes, natural disasters, pandemic, war, accidental damage, or unauthorized access to our or our customers’ information and systems, which could cause delivery delays or restrict the availability of raw materials, key purchased components and finished products;•the timing, regulatory approval and commercial success of customer products that incorporate our products and systems;•whether customers agree to incorporate our products and delivery systems with their new and existing drug products, the ultimate timing and successful commercialization of those products and systems, which involves substantial evaluations of the functional, operational, clinical and economic viability of our products, and the rate, timing and success of regulatory approval for the drug products that incorporate our components and systems;•the timely and adequate availability of filling capacity, which is essential to conducting definitive stability trials and the timing of first commercialization of customers’ products in Crystal Zenith prefilled syringes;•profitability, or mix, of the products sold in any reporting period, including lower-than-expected sales growth of our high-value proprietary product offerings;•maintaining or improving production efficiencies and overhead absorption;•dependence on third-party suppliers and partners, some of which are single-source suppliers of critical materials and products, including our Japanese partner and affiliate, Daikyo;•the loss of key personnel or highly-skilled employees;•the availability and cost of skilled employees required to meet increased production, managerial, research and other needs, including professional employees and persons employed under collective bargaining agreements;•the successful and timely implementation of price increases necessary to offset rising production costs, including raw material prices, particularly petroleum-based raw materials;•the cost and progress of development, regulatory approval and marketing of new products;•our ability to obtain and maintain licenses in any jurisdiction in which we do business;•the relative strength of USD in relation to other currencies, particularly the Euro, SGD, the Danish Krone, Yen, Colombian Peso, Brazilian Real, and the South Korean Won; and•the potential adverse effects of global healthcare legislation on customer demand, product pricing and profitability.This list sets forth many, but not all, of the factors that could affect our ability to achieve results described in any forward-looking statements. Investors should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all of the factors and should not consider this list to be a complete statement of all potential risks and uncertainties. For further discussion of these and other factors, see the risk factors disclosed in Part I, Item 1A of our 2022 Annual Report as well as Part II, section 1A of this quarterly report. Except as required by law or regulation, we undertake no obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.