
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-Q and the audited consolidated financial statements appearing in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references herein to the "Company," "we," "us," or "our," or similar terms, refer to Wynn Resorts, Limited, a Nevada corporation, and its consolidated subsidiaries. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements. Please refer to the section below entitled "Forward-Looking Statements."
We make forward-looking statements in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q based upon the beliefs and assumptions of our management and on information currently available to us. Forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, information about our business strategy, development activities, competition and possible or assumed future results of operations, throughout this report and are often preceded by, followed by or include the words "may," "will," "should," "would," "could," "believe," "expect," "anticipate," "estimate," "intend," "plan," "continue" or the negative of these terms or similar expressions.Forward-looking statements are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those we express in these forward-looking statements, including the risks and uncertainties in Item 1A — "Risk Factors" of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022 and other factors we describe from time to time in our periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"), such as:•the impact on the travel and leisure industry from factors such as an outbreak of an infectious disease, including the COVID-19 pandemic, public incidents of violence, mass shootings, riots, demonstrations, extreme weather patterns or natural disasters, military conflicts, civil unrest, and any future security alerts and/or terrorist attacks;•extensive regulation of our business and the cost of compliance or failure to comply with applicable laws and regulations;•pending or future investigations, litigation and other disputes;•our dependence on key managers and employees;•the deterioration of the macroeconomic environment, including an economic downturn or recession or worsening geopolitical tensions that could reduce discretionary consumer spending;•our ability to maintain our gaming licenses and concessions and comply with applicable gaming law; •international relations, national security policies, anticorruption campaigns and other geopolitical events, which may impact the number of visitors to our properties and the amount of money they are willing to spend;•public perception of our resorts and the level of service we provide; •our dependence on a limited number of resorts and locations for all of our cash flow and our subsidiaries' ability to pay us dividends and distributions;•competition in the casino/hotel and resort industries and actions taken by our competitors, including new development and construction activities of competitors;•our ability to maintain our customer relationships and collect and enforce gaming receivables;•win rates for our gaming operations;•construction and regulatory risks associated with our current and future construction projects;•any violations by us of the anti-money laundering laws or Foreign Corrupt Practices Act;•our compliance with environmental requirements and potential cleanup responsibility and liability as an owner or operator of property;•adverse incidents or adverse publicity concerning our resorts or our corporate responsibilities;•changes in and compliance with the gaming laws or regulations in the various jurisdictions in which we operate;•changes in tax laws or regulations related to taxation, including changes in the rates of taxation;•our collection and use of personal data and our level of compliance with applicable governmental regulations, credit card industry standards and other applicable data security standards;•cybersecurity risk, including cyber and physical security breaches, system failure, computer viruses, and negligent or intentional misuse by customers, company employees, or employees of third-party vendors;•our ability to protect our intellectual property rights; •labor actions and other labor problems; •our current and future insurance coverage levels;
•risks specifically associated with our Macau Operations; •the level of our indebtedness and our ability to meet our debt service obligations (including sensitivity to fluctuations in interest rates); and•continued compliance with the covenants in our debt agreementsFurther information on potential factors that could affect our financial condition, results of operations and business are included in this report and our other filings with the SEC. You should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements, which are based only on information available to us at the time this statement is made. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future developments or otherwise.
We are a designer, developer, and operator of integrated resorts featuring luxury hotel rooms, high-end retail space, an array of dining and entertainment options, meeting and convention facilities, and gaming, all supported by an unparalleled focus on our guests, our people, and our community. Through our approximately 72% ownership of Wynn Macau, Limited ("WML"), our concessionaire Wynn Resorts (Macau) S.A. ("Wynn Macau SA") operates two integrated resorts in the Macau Special Administrative Region ("Macau") of the People's Republic of China ("PRC"), Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau (collectively, our "Macau Operations"). In Las Vegas, Nevada, we operate and, with the exception of certain retail space, own 100% of Wynn Las Vegas. Additionally, we are a 50.1% owner and managing member of a joint venture that owns and leases certain retail space at Wynn Las Vegas (the "Retail Joint Venture"). We refer to Wynn Las Vegas, Encore, an expansion at Wynn Las Vegas, and the Retail Joint Venture as our Las Vegas Operations. In Everett, Massachusetts, we operate Encore Boston Harbor, an integrated resort. We also hold an approximately 97% interest in, and consolidate, Wynn Interactive Ltd. ("Wynn Interactive"), through which we operate WynnBet, our digital sports betting and casino gaming business.
Certain key operating measures specific to the gaming industry are included in our discussion of our operational performance for the periods for which the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations are presented. These key operating measures are presented as supplemental disclosures because management and/or certain investors use these measures to better understand period-over-period fluctuations in our casino and hotel operating revenues. These key operating measures are defined below:•Table drop in mass market for our Macau Operations is the amount of cash that is deposited in a gaming table's drop box plus cash chips purchased at the casino cage. •Table drop for our Las Vegas Operations is the amount of cash and net markers issued that are deposited in a gaming table's drop box.•Table drop for Encore Boston Harbor is the amount of cash and gross markers issued that are deposited in a gaming table's drop box.•Rolling chips are non-negotiable identifiable chips that are used to track turnover for purposes of calculating incentives within our Macau Operations' VIP program.•Turnover is the sum of all losing rolling chip wagers within our Macau Operations' VIP program. •Table games win is the amount of table drop or turnover that is retained and recorded as casino revenues.  Table games win is before discounts, commissions and the allocation of casino revenues to rooms, food and beverage and other revenues for services provided to casino customers on a complimentary basis. Table games win does not include poker rake.•Slot machine win is the amount of handle (representing the total amount wagered) that is retained by us and is recorded as casino revenues. Slot machine win is after adjustment for progressive accruals and free play, but before discounts and the allocation of casino revenues to rooms, food and beverage and other revenues for services provided to casino customers on a complimentary basis.•Poker rake is the portion of cash wagered by patrons in our poker rooms that is retained by the casino as a service fee, after adjustment for progressive accruals, but before the allocation of casino revenues to rooms, food and beverage and other revenues for services provided to casino customers on a complimentary basis. Poker tables are not included in our measure of average number of table games.•Average daily rate ("ADR") is calculated by dividing total room revenues, including complimentaries (less service charges, if any), by total rooms occupied. •Revenue per available room ("REVPAR") is calculated by dividing total room revenues, including complimentaries (less service charges, if any), by total rooms available.
•Occupancy is calculated by dividing total occupied rooms, including complimentary rooms, by the total rooms available. Below is a discussion of the methodologies used to calculate win percentages at our resorts.In our VIP operations in Macau, customers primarily purchase rolling chips from the casino cage and can only use them to make wagers. Winning wagers are paid in cash chips. The loss of the rolling chips in the VIP operations is recorded as turnover and provides a base for calculating VIP win percentage. It is customary in Macau to measure VIP play using this rolling chip method. We typically expect our win as a percentage of turnover from these operations to be within the range of 3.1% to 3.4%. In our mass market operations in Macau, customers may purchase cash chips at either the gaming tables or at the casino cage. The measurements from our VIP and mass market operations are not comparable as the measurement method used in our mass market operations tracks the initial purchase of chips at the table and at the casino cage, while the measurement method from our VIP operations tracks the sum of all losing wagers. Accordingly, the base measurement from the VIP operations is much larger than the base measurement from the mass market operations. As a result, the expected win percentage with the same amount of gaming win is lower in the VIP operations when compared to the mass market operations.In Las Vegas, customers purchase chips at the gaming tables in exchange for cash and markers. Customers may then redeem markers at the gaming tables or at the casino cage. The cash and markers, net of redemptions, used to purchase chips are deposited in the gaming table's drop box. This is the base of measurement that we use for calculating win percentage. Each type of table game has its own theoretical win percentage. Our expected table games win percentage is 22% to 26%.At Encore Boston Harbor, customers purchase chips at the gaming tables in exchange for cash and markers. Customers may then redeem markers only at the casino cage. The cash and gross markers used to purchase chips are deposited in the gaming table's drop box. This is the base of measurement that we use for calculating win percentage. Each type of table game has its own theoretical win percentage. Our expected table games win percentage is 18% to 22%.
The following table summarizes our financial results for the periods presented (dollars in thousands, except per share data):
NM - Not meaningful.The increase in operating revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily driven by increases of $206.0 million, $145.6 million, $95.6 million, and $25.5 million from Wynn Palace, our Las Vegas Operations, Wynn Macau, and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively, resulting from an increase in gaming volumes, hotel occupancy, and covers at restaurants. The results of our Macau Operations for the three months ended March 31, 2022 were negatively impacted by certain travel-related restrictions and conditions, including COVID-19 testing and other mitigation procedures, related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Over the course of December 2022 and January 2023, Macau authorities relaxed or eliminated most COVID-19 related protective measures. Since then, and as of the date of this report, there are no remaining entry restrictions or mandatory quarantine requirements in place for travelers to Macau.The increase in net income attributable to Wynn Resorts, Limited for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily related to increased operating revenues at our Macau Operations, our Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor, partially offset by increased operating expenses associated with higher business volumes.
The following table presents our operating revenues (dollars in thousands):
The following table presents casino and non-casino operating revenues (dollars in thousands):
Casino revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were 53.9% of operating revenues, compared to 51.4% for the same period of 2022. Non-casino revenues for the three months ended March 31, 2023 were 46.1% of operating revenues, compared to 48.6% for the same period of 2022.
Casino revenues increased primarily due to higher gaming volumes at our Macau Operations following the discontinuation of pandemic-related travel restrictions in Macau in late 2022 and early 2023. The table below sets forth our casino revenues and associated key operating measures (dollars in thousands, except for win per unit per day):
NM - Not meaningful.
The table below sets forth our room revenues and associated key operating measures:
Room revenues increased $102.2 million, primarily due to higher occupancy and ADR at our Macau Operations and our Las Vegas Operations. Food and beverage revenues increased $58.6 million, primarily due to increased restaurant covers at our Las Vegas Operations.   Entertainment, retail and other revenues increased $32.5 million, primarily due to increased convention support services, revenues from our owned and leased retail outlets, and entertainment venue sales at our Las Vegas Operations.
The table below presents operating expenses (dollars in thousands):
NM - Not meaningful.Total operating expenses increased $206.0 million compared to the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to increased operating costs associated with higher business volumes at each of our properties, partially offset by decreased depreciation and amortization and property charges and other expenses.Casino expenses increased $91.9 million, $40.4 million, $7.6 million, and $9.5 million at Wynn Palace, Wynn Macau, our Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively. These increases were primarily due to increased operating costs, including gaming tax expense, driven by the increase in casino revenues. Room expenses increased $9.1 million and $2.1 million at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively. These increases were primarily a result of higher operating costs related to the increase in occupancy.    Food and beverage expenses increased $24.9 million and $4.3 million at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor, respectively. These increases were primarily a result of increased operating costs related to an increase in food and beverage revenues at our Las Vegas Operations and Encore Boston Harbor.  Entertainment, retail and other expenses increased $17.3 million at our Las Vegas operations, primarily due to higher operating costs associated with live and theatrical entertainment, partially offset by a decrease of $14.1 million at Wynn Interactive, primarily due to decreased marketing costs. General and administrative expenses increased primarily due to increases of $35.3 million and $14.6 million at Encore Boston Harbor and our Las Vegas Operations, respectively. These increases were attributable to triple-net operating lease expense at Encore Boston Harbor following the sale-leaseback transaction in December 2022, and increases in payroll and other general and administrative expenses at our Las Vegas Operations required to support higher business volumes during the three months ended March 31, 2023. In addition, corporate and other general and administrative expenses increased $12.1 million, primarily due to increased development costs.For the three months ended March 31, 2023, pre-opening expenses totaled $4.5 million, which primarily related to the launch of Wynn Interactive operations in Massachusetts. For the three months ended March 31, 2022, pre-opening expenses totaled $2.4 million, which primarily related to reconfiguring the theater space at Wynn Las Vegas.Depreciation and amortization decreased $15.7 million, primarily due to the derecognition of certain real estate assets in connection with the Encore Boston Harbor sale-leaseback transaction in December 2022.Property charges and other expenses for the three months ended March 31, 2023 consisted primarily of asset abandonments of $2.2 million at Wynn Palace. Our property charges and other expenses for the quarter ended March 31, 2022 consisted primarily of impairment of goodwill of $30.3 million at Wynn Interactive, asset abandonments of $1.0 million and
$2.1 million at our Las Vegas Operations and Wynn Interactive, respectively, and contract termination expenses of $9.6 million at Wynn Interactive.
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased $35.6 million primarily due to an increase in the weighted average total debt balance and an increase in the weighted average interest rate to 5.95% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, from 5.05% for the three months ended March 31, 2022.We recorded interest income of $40.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily related to interest earned on cash and cash equivalents held at financial institutions. We incurred a foreign currency remeasurement loss of $30.6 million and $15.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The impact of the exchange rate fluctuation of the Macau pataca, in relation to the U.S. dollar, on the remeasurements of U.S. dollar denominated debt and other obligations from our Macau-related entities drove the variability between periods.  We recorded a gain of $23.0 million and $7.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively, from change in derivatives fair value. The change in derivatives fair value for the three months ended March 31, 2023 included a gain of $24.9 million recorded in relation to the conversion feature of the WML Convertible Bonds.We recorded a $12.2 million loss on debt financing transactions for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily related to the issuance of the 2031 WRF Senior Notes and the repurchase of the tendered 2025 WRF Senior Notes.
We recorded income tax expense of $1.0 million and $1.1 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Income tax expense in 2023 primarily relates to U.S. operating profits. Income tax expense in 2022 primarily related to the Macau dividend tax agreement that provides for an annual payment as complementary tax otherwise due by stockholders of WRM.
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interests was $11.2 million and $71.3 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. These amounts are primarily related to the noncontrolling interests' share of net loss from WML.
As further described in Item 1—"Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements," Note 18, "Segment Information," we use Adjusted Property EBITDAR to manage the operating results of our segments. Adjusted Property EBITDAR is net income (loss) before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, pre-opening expenses, property charges and other, triple-net operating lease rent expense related to Encore Boston Harbor, management and license fees, corporate expenses and other (including intercompany golf course, meeting and convention, and water rights leases), stock-based compensation, change in derivatives fair value, loss on debt financing transactions, and other non-operating income and expenses. Adjusted Property EBITDAR is presented exclusively as a supplemental disclosure because management believes that it is widely used to measure the performance, and as a basis for valuation, of gaming companies. Management uses Adjusted Property EBITDAR as a measure of the operating performance of its segments and to compare the operating performance of its properties with those of its competitors, as well as a basis for determining certain incentive compensation. We also present Adjusted Property EBITDAR because it is used by some investors to measure a company's ability to incur and service debt, make capital expenditures and meet working capital requirements. Gaming companies have historically reported EBITDAR as a supplement to GAAP. In order to view the operations of their casinos on a more stand-alone basis, gaming companies, including us, have historically excluded from their EBITDAR calculations preopening expenses, property charges, corporate expenses and stock-based compensation, that do not relate to the management of specific casino properties. However, Adjusted Property EBITDAR should not be considered as an alternative to operating income (loss) as an indicator of our performance, as an alternative to cash flows from operating activities as a measure of liquidity, or as an alternative to any other measure determined in accordance with GAAP. Unlike net income (loss), Adjusted Property EBITDAR does not include depreciation or interest expense and therefore does not reflect current or future capital expenditures or the cost of capital. We have significant uses of cash flows, including capital expenditures, triple-net operating lease rent expense related to Encore Boston Harbor, interest payments, debt principal repayments, income taxes and other non-recurring charges, which are not reflected in Adjusted Property EBITDAR. Also, our calculation of Adjusted Property EBITDAR may be different from the calculation methods used by other companies and, therefore, comparability may be limited.The following table summarizes Adjusted Property EBITDAR (dollars in thousands) for Wynn Palace, Wynn Macau, Las Vegas Operations, Encore Boston Harbor, and Wynn Interactive as reviewed by management and summarized in Item 1—"Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements," Note 18, "Segment Information." That footnote also presents a reconciliation of Adjusted Property EBITDAR to net income (loss) attributable to Wynn Resorts, Limited.
NM - Not meaningful. Adjusted Property EBITDAR at Wynn Palace and Wynn Macau increased $111.9 million and $49.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, respectively, primarily due to an increase in operating revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses. In December 2022 and early January 2023, the Macau government relaxed or eliminated most of COVID-19 related protective measures, which resulted in increased business volumes at our Macau Operations for the three months ended March 31, 2023. Our Macau Operations for the three months ended March 31, 2022 were negatively impacted by certain travel-related restrictions and conditions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Adjusted Property EBITDAR at our Las Vegas Operations increased $72.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to an increase in revenues from casino, hotel, and food and beverage operations, partially offset by increased operating expenses. Adjusted Property EBITDAR at Encore Boston Harbor increased $8.2 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to an increase in revenues from casino operations, partially offset by increased operating expenses.
Adjusted Property EBITDAR at Wynn Interactive increased $10.4 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily due to a decrease in marketing and promotional expenses, depreciation and amortization, and property charges and other expenses. Refer to the discussions above regarding the specific details of our results of operations.
Our cash flows were as follows (in thousands):
Our operating cash flows primarily consist of operating income (excluding depreciation and amortization and other non-cash charges), interest paid and earned, and changes in working capital accounts such as receivables, inventories, prepaid expenses, and payables. Our table games play is a mix of cash play and credit play, while our slot machine play is conducted primarily on a cash basis. A significant portion of our table games revenue is attributable to the play of a limited number of premium customers who gamble on credit. The ability to collect these gaming receivables may impact our operating cash flow for the period. Our rooms, food and beverage, and entertainment, retail and other revenue is conducted on a cash and credit basis. Accordingly, operating cash flows will be impacted by changes in operating income and accounts receivable, net.During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the increase in cash flows from operating activities was primarily due to increased revenues from our Macau Operations, our Las Vegas Operations, and Encore Boston Harbor, which was partially offset by an increase in operating expenses associated with higher business volumes. During the three months ended March 31, 2022, the decrease in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to increased operating revenues, partially offset by an increase in operating expenses.
Our investing activities primarily consist of project capital expenditures and maintenance capital expenditures associated with maintaining and continually refining our world-class integrated resort properties.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we incurred capital expenditures of $38.5 million at our Las Vegas Operations, $30.1 million at Encore Boston Harbor, $6.4 million at Wynn Palace, and $3.0 million at Wynn Macau primarily related to maintenance capital expenditures, and $46.5 million at Corporate and other primarily related to future development projects.During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we incurred capital expenditures of $67.8 million at our Las Vegas Operations primarily related to the Wynn Las Vegas room remodel, and $7.5 million at Encore Boston Harbor, $13.1 million at Wynn Palace, and $4.2 million at Wynn Macau, each primarily related to maintenance capital expenditures.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, the cash flows from financing activities was primarily due to the following debt issuances and repayments (in thousands):
In addition, during the three months ended March 31, 2023, we paid $31.3 million for financing costs related to the financing activities above.During the three months ended March 31, 2022, we received a $50.0 million contribution from a noncontrolling interest holder in exchange for a 49.9% interest in certain retail space contributed by the Company to the Retail Joint Venture. In addition, we made a $12.5 million quarterly amortization payment under the WRF Term Loan Facility.
The following table summarizes our unrestricted cash and cash equivalents and available revolver borrowing capacity presented by significant financing entity as of March 31, 2023 (in thousands):
(1) Excluding Wynn Macau, Limited and subsidiaries.Wynn Macau, Limited and subsidiaries. WML generates cash from our Macau Operations. We expect to use this cash to fund working capital and capital expenditure requirements at WML and our Macau Operations, and to service our WML Senior Notes, WM Cayman II Revolver, and WML Convertible Bonds. WML paid no dividends during 2022 or the three months ended March 31, 2023.The borrowings under the WM Cayman II Revolver bear interest at LIBOR or HIBOR plus a margin of 2.625% per annum until June 30, 2023, the date from which the margin will be 1.875% to 2.875% per annum based on WM Cayman II’s leverage ratio on a consolidated basis. The final maturity of all outstanding loans under the Revolving Facility is September 16, 2025.On May 5, 2022, WM Cayman II and its lenders agreed to waive certain financial covenants in the facility agreement under the WM Cayman II Revolver in respect of the relevant periods ending on the following applicable test dates: (a) June 30,
2022; (b) September 30, 2022; (c) December 31, 2022; and (d) March 31, 2023; and to provide for a floor on the interest rate margin of 2.625% per annum through June 30, 2023. WML, as guarantor, may be subject to certain restrictions on payments of dividends or distributions to its shareholders, unless certain financial criteria have been satisfied through the facility agreement.On March 7, 2023, WML completed an offering (the "Offering") of $600.0 million 4.50% convertible bonds due 2029 (the "WML Convertible Bonds"). The WML Convertible Bonds are constituted by a trust deed dated March 7, 2023 (the "Trust Deed"). The net proceeds from the Offering, after deduction of commission and other related expenses, were $585.9 million. WML intends to use the proceeds for general corporate purposes. The WML Convertible Bonds bear interest on their outstanding principal amount from and including March 7, 2023 at the rate of 4.50% per annum. The WML Convertible Bonds are convertible at the option of the holder thereof into fully paid ordinary shares of WML, at the initial conversion price of approximately HK$10.24 (equivalent to approximately $1.30) per share, subject to and upon compliance with the terms and conditions of the WML Convertible Bonds (the "Terms and Conditions," and such right, the "Conversion Right"). The conversion price is at the fixed rate of HK$7.8497 (equivalent to US$1.00), subject to standard adjustments for certain dilutive events as described in the Terms and Conditions. WML has the option, in its sole discretion, to pay to the relevant bondholder an amount of cash equivalent in order to satisfy the Conversion Right in whole or in part. The holders of the WML Convertible Bonds have the option to require WML to redeem all or some only of such holder’s Bonds (i) on March 7, 2027 at their principal amount together with interest accrued but unpaid to (but excluding) the date fixed for redemption; or (ii) on the Relevant Event Redemption Date (as defined in the Terms and Conditions) at their principal amount together with interest accrued but unpaid to, but excluding such date, following the occurrence of (a) when the Ordinary Shares cease to be listed or admitted to trading or are suspended from trading for a period equal to or exceeding 10 consecutive trading days on the Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited, or if applicable, the alternative stock exchange, (b) when there is a Change of Control (as defined in the Terms and Conditions), or (c) when less than 25% of WML’s total number of issued Ordinary Shares are held by the public (as interpreted under Rule 8.24 of the Rules Governing the Listing of Securities on The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited). The WML Convertible Bonds may also be redeemed at the option of WML in whole, but not in part, at any time after March 7, 2027, but prior to March 7, 2029, upon giving notice to the bondholders in accordance with the Terms and Conditions, under certain circumstances specified in the Trust Deed.If our portion of our cash and cash equivalents were repatriated to the U.S. on March 31, 2023, it would be subject to minimal U.S. taxes in the year of repatriation.Wynn Resorts Finance, LLC and subsidiaries. Wynn Resorts Finance, LLC ("WRF" or "Wynn Resorts Finance") generates cash from distributions from its subsidiaries, which include our Macau Operations, Wynn Las Vegas, and Encore Boston Harbor, and capital contributions from Wynn Resorts, as required. In addition, WRF may utilize its available revolving borrowing capacity as needed. We expect to use this cash to service our WRF Credit Facilities, the WRF Senior Notes and the Wynn Las Vegas Senior Notes, and to fund working capital and capital expenditure requirements as needed.WRF is a holding company and, as a result, its ability to pay dividends to Wynn Resorts is dependent on WRF receiving distributions from its subsidiaries, which include WML, Wynn Las Vegas, LLC, and Wynn MA. The WRF Credit Agreement contains customary negative and financial covenants, including, but not limited to, covenants that restrict WRF's ability to pay dividends or distributions and incur additional indebtedness.On February 16, 2023, WRF and its subsidiary Wynn Resorts Capital Corp. (together with WRF, the “WRF Issuers”) issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of 7 1/8% Senior Notes due 2031 (the "2031 WRF Senior Notes") in a private offering. The 2031 WRF Senior Notes were issued at par, for proceeds of $596.2 million, net of $3.8 million of related fees and expenses. Also on February 16, 2023, WRF completed a cash tender offer for any and all of the outstanding principal amount of the 2025 WRF Senior Notes, and accepted for purchase valid tenders with respect to $506.4 million and paid a tender premium of $12.4 million. We used a portion of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2031 WRF Senior Notes to purchase such tendered 2025 WRF Senior Notes and to pay related fees and expenses, and intend to use the remaining net proceeds for general corporate purposes. In April 2023, we repurchased the remaining outstanding 2025 WRF Senior Notes using the remaining net proceeds from the issuance of the 2031 WRF Senior Notes and cash held by WRF, at a price equal to 101.938% of the principal amount plus accrued interest under the terms of its indenture.
In March 2023, we repurchased all of the outstanding Wynn Las Vegas 4.25% Senior Notes due 2023 of $500.0 million using cash held by WRF, at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount plus accrued interest under the terms of their indenture. Wynn Resorts, Limited and other subsidiaries. Wynn Resorts, Limited is a holding company and, as a result, our ability to pay dividends is dependent on our ability to obtain funds and our subsidiaries' ability to provide funds to us. Wynn Resorts, Limited and other primarily generates cash from royalty (including intellectual property license) and management agreements with our resorts, dividends and distributions from our subsidiaries, and the operations of the Retail Joint Venture of which we own 50.1%. Fees payable by Wynn Macau SA to Wynn Resorts, Limited under its intellectual property license agreement are capped at $75.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2023. We expect to use cash held by Wynn Resorts, Limited and other to service our Retail Term Loan, to pay dividends, to fund future development projects, and for general corporate purposes.Wynn Resorts, Limited has resumed its quarterly dividend program, with a cash dividend of $0.25 per share declared on May 9, 2023, payable on June 6, 2023 to stockholders of record as of May 23, 2023.
We may refinance all or a portion of our indebtedness on or before maturity. We cannot assure you that we will be able to refinance any of the indebtedness on acceptable terms or at all.Legal proceedings in which we are involved also may impact our liquidity. No assurance can be provided as to the outcome of such proceedings. In addition, litigation inherently involves significant costs. For information regarding legal proceedings, see Note 16, "Commitments and Contingencies."In April 2016, our Board of Directors has authorized an equity repurchase program of up to $1.00 billion. Under the equity repurchase program, we may repurchase the Company's outstanding shares from time to time through open market purchases, in privately negotiated transactions, and under plans complying with Rules 10b5-1 and 10b-18 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"). During the three months ended March 31, 2023, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock under this equity repurchase program. As of March 31, 2023, we had $628.8 million in repurchase authority remaining under the program.We have in the past repurchased, and in the future, we may periodically consider repurchasing our outstanding notes for cash. The amount of any shares and/or notes to be repurchased, as well as the timing of any repurchases, will be based on business, market and other conditions and factors, including price, contractual requirements or consents, and capital availability.New business developments or other unforeseen events may occur, resulting in the need to raise additional funds. We continue to explore opportunities to develop additional gaming or related businesses in domestic and international markets. There can be no assurances regarding the business prospects with respect to any other opportunity. Any new development may require us to obtain additional financing. We may decide to conduct any such development through Wynn Resorts, Limited or through subsidiaries separate from the Las Vegas, Boston or Macau-related entities.
During the three months ended March 31, 2023, except as described below, there have been no material changes to the contractual obligations previously reported in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. During the three months ended March 31, 2023, our fixed interest rate long-term debt obligations increased by a net amount of $193.5 million, as a result of $1.20 billion in long-term debt issuances, net of $1.01 billion in debt repayments. Additionally, our annual fixed interest payments are expected to increase $15.6 million in 2023, $30.5 million in 2024, $58.3 million in 2025, $69.8 million in each of 2026 and 2027, and $166.2 million thereafter, primarily as a result of the issuance of the WRF 2031 Senior Notes and the WML Convertible Bonds and the repurchase of the tendered 2025 WRF Senior Notes and the 2023 Wynn Las Vegas Senior Notes, each as described above.
A description of our critical accounting policies is included in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2022. Except as described below, there have been no significant changes to these policies for the three months ended March 31, 2023:
On March 7, 2023, WML completed the Offering of the WML Convertible Bonds. The Company determined that the conversion feature contained within the WML Convertible Bonds is not indexed to WML's equity and, as such, is required to be bifurcated from the debt host contract and accounted for as a free-standing derivative (the "WML Convertible Bonds Conversion Option Derivative"). In accordance with applicable accounting standards, the WML Convertible Bond Conversion Option Derivative will be recorded at fair value each reporting period, with changes recognized in the statement of operations.The Company used a binomial lattice model in order to estimate the fair value of the embedded derivative in the WML Convertible Bonds. Inherent in a binomial options pricing model are unobservable (Level 3) inputs and assumptions related to expected share-price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected term, and dividend yield. The Company estimates the volatility of shares of WML common stock based on historical volatility that matches the expected remaining term to maturity of the WML Convertible Bonds. The risk-free interest rate is based on the Hong Kong and United States benchmark yield curves on the valuation date for a maturity similar to the expected remaining term of the WML Convertible Bonds. The expected life of the WML Convertible Bonds is assumed to be equivalent to their remaining term to maturity. The dividend yield is based on the historical WML dividend rate over the last several years. The output of the lattice model can be highly sensitive to fluctuations in its inputs.
See related disclosure in Note 2, "Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies" of Part I in this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.