
Zoetis is a global leader in the animal health industry, focused on the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of medicines, vaccines, diagnostic products and services, biodevices, genetic tests and precision animal health technology. For over 70 years, we have been innovating ways to predict, prevent, detect, and treat animal illness, and continue to stand by those raising and caring for animals worldwide - from veterinarians and pet owners to livestock farmers and ranchers. We manage our operations through two geographic operating segments: the United States (U.S.) and International. Within each of these operating segments, we offer a diversified product portfolio for both companion animal and livestock customers in order to capitalize on local and regional trends and customer needs. See Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements — Note 16. Segment Information. We directly market our products to veterinarians and livestock producers located in approximately 45 countries across North America, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia and South America, and are a market leader in nearly all of the major regions in which we operate. Through our efforts to establish an early and direct presence in many emerging markets, such as Brazil, Chile, China and Mexico, we believe we are one of the largest animal health medicines and vaccines businesses as measured by revenue across emerging markets as a whole. In markets where we do not have a direct commercial presence, we generally contract with distributors that provide logistics and sales and marketing support for our products. We believe our investments in one of the industry’s largest sales organizations, including our extensive network of technical and veterinary operations specialists, our high-quality manufacturing and reliability of supply, and our long track record of developing products that meet customer needs, has led to enduring and valued relationships with our customers. Our research and development (R&D) efforts enable us to deliver innovative products to address unmet needs and evolve our product lines so that they remain relevant for our customers.We have approximately 300 product lines that we sell in over 100 countries for the prediction, prevention, detection and treatment of diseases and conditions that affect various companion animal and livestock species. The diversity of our product portfolio and our global operations provides stability to our overall business. For instance, in livestock, impacts on our revenue that may result from disease outbreaks or weather conditions in a particular market or region are often offset by increased sales in other regions from exports and other species as consumers shift to other animal proteins.A summary of our 2023 performance compared with the comparable 2022 period follows:
(a)    Operational growth and adjusted net income are non-GAAP financial measures. See the Non-GAAP financial measures section of this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) for more information.
For a description of our operating environment, including factors which could materially affect our business, financial condition, or future results, see "Our Operating Environment" in the MD&A of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K. Set forth below are updates to certain of the factors disclosed in our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our quarterly financial results are subject to variability related to a number of factors including, but not limited to: the continuing decline in global macroeconomic conditions, global supply chain disruption, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, variability in distributor inventory stocking levels as a result of expected demand and promotional activities, weather patterns, herd management decisions, regulatory actions, inflation, competitive dynamics, disease outbreaks, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, product and geographic mix, timing of price increases and timing of investment decisions.
We are seeing improvements and recovery in supply for certain products as compared to the prior year. However, we continue to have supply chain challenges for other products and component parts, as well as competition for manufacturing inputs. Our global manufacturing team remains committed to addressing specific issues with ongoing supply chain optimizations, controlled launches for new products in additional markets and customer coordination.
Sales of our livestock products have in the past, and may in the future be, adversely affected by the outbreak of disease carried by animals. Outbreaks of disease may reduce regional or global sales of particular animal-derived food products or result in reduced exports of such products, either due to heightened export restrictions or import prohibitions, which may reduce demand for our products. Also, the outbreak of any highly contagious disease near our main production sites could require us to immediately halt production of our products at such sites or force us to incur substantial expenses in procuring raw materials or products elsewhere. Alternatively, sales of products that treat specific disease outbreaks may increase.
Significant portions of our revenue and costs are exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. Our products are sold in more than 100 countries and, as a result, our revenue is influenced by changes in foreign exchange rates. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, approximately 45% of our revenue was denominated in foreign currencies. We seek to manage our foreign exchange risk, in part, through operational means, including managing same-currency revenue in relation to same-currency costs and same-currency assets in relation to same-currency liabilities. As we operate in multiple foreign currencies, including the Australian dollar, Brazilian real, British pound, Canadian dollar, Chinese yuan, euro and other currencies, changes in those currencies relative to the U.S. dollar will impact our revenue, cost of goods and expenses, and consequently, net income. Exchange rate fluctuations may also have an impact beyond our reported financial results and directly impact operations. These fluctuations may affect the ability to buy and sell our goods and services between markets impacted by significant exchange rate variances. For the three months ended March 31, 2023, approximately 55% of our total revenue was in U.S. dollars. Our year-over-year total revenue growth was unfavorably impacted by approximately 3% from changes in foreign currency values relative to the U.S. dollar. For operations in highly inflationary economies, we translate monetary items at rates in effect at the balance sheet date, with translation adjustments recorded in Other (income)/deductions––net, and we translate non-monetary items at historical rates.
We report information in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Management also measures performance using non-GAAP financial measures that may exclude certain amounts from the most directly comparable GAAP measure. Despite the importance of these measures to management in goal setting and performance measurement, non-GAAP financial measures have no standardized meaning prescribed by U.S. GAAP and, therefore, have limits in their usefulness to investors and may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. We present certain identified non-GAAP measures solely to provide investors with useful information to more fully understand how management assesses performance.
We believe that it is important to not only understand overall revenue and earnings growth, but also “operational growth.” Operational growth is a non-GAAP financial measure defined as revenue or earnings growth excluding the impact of foreign exchange. This measure provides information on the change in revenue and earnings as if foreign currency exchange rates had not changed between the current and prior periods to facilitate a period-to-period comparison. We believe this non-GAAP measure provides a useful comparison to previous periods for the company and investors, but should not be viewed as a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported growth.
Adjusted net income and the corresponding adjusted earnings per share (EPS) are non-GAAP financial measures of performance used by management. We believe these financial measures are useful supplemental information to investors when considered together with our U.S. GAAP financial measures. We report adjusted net income to portray the results of our major operations, and the discovery, development, manufacture and commercialization of our products, prior to considering certain income statement elements. We define adjusted net income and adjusted EPS as net income attributable to Zoetis and EPS before the impact of purchase accounting adjustments, acquisition-related costs and certain significant items. We recognize that, as an internal measure of performance, the adjusted net income and adjusted EPS measures have limitations, and we do not restrict our performance management process solely to these metrics. A limitation of the adjusted net income and adjusted EPS measures is that they provide a view of our operations without including all events during a period, such as the effects of an acquisition or amortization of purchased intangibles, and do not provide a comparable view of our performance to other companies. The adjusted net income and adjusted EPS measures are not, and should not be viewed as, a substitute for U.S. GAAP reported net income attributable to Zoetis and reported EPS. See the Adjusted Net Income section below for more information.
The following discussion and analysis of our statements of income should be read along with our condensed consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included elsewhere in
of this Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q.
*Calculation not meaningful
Total revenue increased by $14 million, or 1%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, an increase of $79 million, or 4%, on an operational basis. Operational revenue growth was comprised primarily of the following:•price growth of approximately 5%;•volume growth from new products of approximately 1%,partially offset by:•volume decrease from key dermatology products of approximately 1%; and•volume decrease from other in-line products of approximately 1%.Foreign exchange decreased reported revenue growth by approximately 3%.
Cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was 29.4% in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with 28.7% in the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase was primarily as a result of:•unfavorable manufacturing and other costs;•unfavorable product mix; and•inventory obsolescence, scrap and other charges,partially offset by:•favorable foreign exchange; and•price increases.
SG&A expenses increased by $40 million, or 9%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily as a result of: •certain compensation-related costs primarily due to timing of new hires in 2022;•higher travel and entertainment expenses; and•higher freight and logistics costs;partially offset by:•favorable foreign exchange; and•lower bad debt reserves for accounts receivable.
R&D expenses increased by $20 million, or 16%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily as a result of: •an increase in certain compensation-related costs to support innovation;•higher other operating costs; and•increased spending driven by project investments,partially offset by:•favorable foreign exchange.
Amortization of intangible assets decreased in the three months ended March 31, 2023 versus the comparable prior year period primarily due to asset impairments taken in 2022 and assets that became fully amortized during 2022, partially offset by intangible assets acquired during 2022.
* Calculation not meaningfulRestructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs were $21 million and $2 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs in the three months ended March 31, 2023 primarily consisted of employee termination costs related to organizational structure refinements. Restructuring charges and certain acquisition-related costs in the three months ended March 31, 2022 primarily consisted of integration costs related to recent acquisitions.
Interest expense, net of capitalized interest, increased by $10 million, or 19%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023 versus the comparable prior year period. The increase was primarily as a result of higher interest rates on the $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 2022 senior notes issued in November 2022 as compared to the 2013 senior notes redeemed in February 2023, upon maturity, as well as a higher debt balance during a portion of the current period. This increase was partially offset by higher gains on foreign exchange derivative instruments as compared to the prior year period.
*Calculation not meaningfulThe change in Other (income)/deductions—net in the three months ended March 31, 2023 versus the comparable prior year period was primarily as a result of royalty-related income that was predominantly associated with a settlement for underpayment of royalties in prior periods and higher interest income in the current period due to higher interest rates on cash balances denominated in the U.S. dollar.
Our effective tax rate was 20.9% for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with 18.3% for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The higher effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was attributable to lower net discrete tax benefits for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and a less favorable jurisdictional mix of earnings (which includes the impact of the location of earnings and repatriation costs), partially offset by a higher benefit in the U.S. related to foreign-derived intangible income for the three months ended March 31, 2023. Jurisdictional mix of earnings can vary depending on repatriation decisions, operating fluctuations in the normal course of business and the impact of non-deductible items and non-taxable items.
On a global basis, the mix of revenue between companion animal and livestock products was as follows:
Earnings by segment and the operational and foreign exchange changes versus the comparable prior year period were as follows:
* Calculation not meaningful
U.S. segment revenue decreased by $15 million, or 1%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, reflecting a decrease of $53 million in companion animal products, partially offset by an increase of $38 million in livestock products. •Companion animal revenue in the quarter was impacted by distributor de-stocking across the portfolio, as well as purchases in the fourth quarter of 2022 ahead of expected price increases and based on promotional activities. Revenue declined due to small animal parasiticides, anti-infectives and key dermatology, partially offset by our mAb product, Solensia.   •Livestock revenue grew due to cattle and poultry, partially offset by a decline in swine. Sales of cattle products grew due to improved supply of key products and higher distributor inventory levels. Sales of products in our poultry portfolio grew due to increases in vaccines and biodevices. Sales of swine products declined due to decreased disease prevalence.U.S. segment earnings decreased by $56 million, or 8%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to higher operating expenses and cost of sales, as well as lower revenue.
International segment revenue increased by $30 million, or 3%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022. Operational revenue increased by $95 million, or 10%, driven by growth of $49 million in companion animal products and growth of $46 million in livestock products. •Companion animal operational revenue growth was driven primarily by the recent launches of our mAb products, Librela and Solensia, as well as growth in the Simparica franchise.•Livestock operational revenue growth was due to increased sales of cattle, sheep, poultry and fish products. Sales of cattle products grew due to price and favorable market conditions in key and emerging markets. Sales of sheep products grew as a result of favorable market conditions in Australia and the acquisition of Jurox. Sales of poultry products grew due to market growth, demand generation efforts and price in key poultry markets. Growth in our fish portfolio was primarily the result of increased sales of vaccines across key salmon markets, primarily Norway.•Additionally, International segment revenue was unfavorably impacted by foreign exchange which decreased revenue by $65 million, or 7%, primarily driven by the euro, Argentinian peso, Chinese renminbi, British pound and Japanese yen.International segment earnings decreased by $3 million, or 1%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022. Operational earnings growth was $24 million, or 4%, primarily due to revenue, partially offset by higher cost of sales and operating expenses.
Other business activities includes our Client Supply Services contract manufacturing results, our human health business and expenses associated with our dedicated veterinary medicine research and development organization, research alliances, U.S. regulatory affairs and other operations focused on the development of our products. Other R&D-related costs associated with non-U.S. market and regulatory activities are generally included in the International segment. Other business activities net loss increased by $16 million in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, reflecting an increase in R&D costs due to an increase in certain compensation-related costs to support innovation, an increase in operating costs and an increase in project investments, as well as lower earnings in our human health business, partially offset by favorable foreign exchange.
Reconciling items include certain costs that are not allocated to our operating segments results, such as costs associated with the following:•Corporate, which includes certain costs associated with information technology, facilities, legal, finance, human resources, business development and communications, among others. These costs also include certain compensation costs, certain procurement costs, and other miscellaneous operating expenses that are not charged to our operating segments, as well as interest income and expense; •Certain transactions and events such as (i) Purchase accounting adjustments, which includes expenses associated with the amortization of fair value adjustments to inventory, intangible assets, and property, plant and equipment; (ii) Acquisition-related activities, which includes costs for acquisitions and integration; and (iii) Certain significant items, which includes non-acquisition-related restructuring charges, certain asset impairment charges, certain legal and commercial settlements, and costs associated with cost reduction/productivity initiatives; and•Other unallocated, which includes (i) certain overhead expenses associated with our global manufacturing operations not charged to our operating segments; (ii) certain costs associated with finance that specifically support our global manufacturing operations; (iii) certain supply chain and global logistics costs; and (iv) certain procurement costs.Corporate expenses decreased by $51 million, or 20%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily associated with a settlement for underpayment of royalties in prior periods, favorable interest income and favorable foreign exchange, partially offset by higher interest expense, increases in professional services and investments in information technology.Other unallocated expenses decreased by $17 million, or 21%, in the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily due to favorable foreign exchange and lower freight charges, partially offset by inventory obsolescence and scrap.See Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements—Note 16. Segment Information for further information.
Adjusted net income is an alternative view of performance used by management, and we believe that investors’ understanding of our performance is enhanced by disclosing this performance measure. The adjusted net income measure is an important internal measurement for us. Additionally, we measure our overall performance on this basis in conjunction with other performance metrics. The following are examples of how the adjusted net income measure is utilized: •senior management receives a monthly analysis of our operating results that is prepared on an adjusted net income basis; •our annual budgets are prepared on an adjusted net income basis; and •other goal setting and performance measurements.
Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering certain significant purchase accounting impacts that result from business combinations and net asset acquisitions. These impacts, primarily associated with certain acquisitions, include amortization related to the increase in fair value of the acquired finite-lived intangible assets and depreciation related to the increase/decrease to fair value of the acquired fixed assets. Therefore, the adjusted net income measure includes the revenue earned upon the sale of the acquired products without considering the aforementioned significant charges. While certain purchase accounting adjustments can occur through 20 or more years, this presentation provides an alternative view of our performance that is used by management to internally assess business performance. We believe the elimination of amortization attributable to acquired intangible assets provides management and investors an alternative view of our business results by providing a degree of parity to internally developed intangible assets for which R&D costs previously have been expensed. A completely accurate comparison of internally developed intangible assets and acquired intangible assets cannot be achieved through adjusted net income. These components of adjusted net income are derived solely from the impact of the items listed above. We have not factored in the impact of any other differences in experience that might have occurred if we had discovered and developed those intangible assets on our own, and this approach does not intend to be representative of the results that would have occurred in those circumstances. For example, our R&D costs in total, and in the periods presented, may have been different; our speed to commercialization and resulting revenue, if any, may have been different; or our costs to manufacture may have been different. In addition, our marketing efforts may have been received differently by our customers. As such, in total, there can be no assurance that our adjusted net income amounts would have been the same as presented had we discovered and developed the acquired intangible assets.
Adjusted net income is calculated prior to considering transaction and integration costs associated with significant business combinations or net asset acquisitions because these costs are unique to each transaction and represent costs that were incurred to acquire and integrate certain businesses as a result of the acquisition decision. We have made no adjustments for the resulting synergies. We believe that viewing income prior to considering these charges provides investors with a useful additional perspective because the significant costs incurred in a business combination result primarily from the need to eliminate duplicate assets, activities or employees––a natural result of acquiring a fully integrated set of activities. For this reason, we believe that the costs incurred to convert disparate systems, to close duplicative facilities or to eliminate duplicate positions (for example, in the context of a business combination) can be viewed differently from those costs incurred in the ordinary course of business. The integration costs associated with a business combination may occur over several years, with the more significant impacts generally ending within three years of the transaction. Because of the need for certain external approvals for some actions, the span of time needed to achieve certain restructuring and integration activities can be lengthy. For example, due to the regulated nature of the animal health medicines, vaccines and diagnostic business, the closure of excess facilities can take several years, as all manufacturing changes are subject to extensive validation and testing and must be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and/or other regulatory authorities.
Adjusted net income is calculated excluding certain significant items. Certain significant items represent substantive, unusual items that are evaluated on an individual basis. Such evaluation considers both the quantitative and the qualitative aspect of their unusual nature. Unusual, in this context, may represent items that are not part of our ongoing business; items that, either as a result of their nature or size, we would not expect to occur as part of our normal business on a regular basis; items that would be nonrecurring; or items that relate to products that we no longer sell. While not all-inclusive, examples of items that could be included as certain significant items would be costs related to a major non-acquisition-related restructuring charge and associated implementation costs for a program that is specific in nature with a defined term, such as those related to our non-acquisition-related cost-reduction and productivity initiatives; amounts related to disposals of products or facilities that do not qualify as discontinued operations as defined by U.S. GAAP; certain asset impairments; adjustments related to the resolution of certain tax positions; significant currency devaluation; the impact of adopting certain significant, event-driven tax legislation; or charges related to legal matters. See Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements—Note 15. Commitments and Contingencies. Our normal, ongoing defense costs or settlements of and accruals on legal matters made in the normal course of our business would not be considered certain significant items.
A reconciliation of net income attributable to Zoetis, as reported under U.S. GAAP, to adjusted net income follows:
*Calculation not meaningful(a)    The effective tax rate on adjusted pretax income was 20.5% and 18.9% for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The higher effective tax rate for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with the three months ended March 31, 2022, was attributable to lower net discrete tax benefits for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and less favorable jurisdictional mix of earnings (which includes the impact of the location of earnings and repatriation costs), partially offset by a higher benefit in the U.S. related to foreign-derived intangible income for the three months ended March 31, 2023. Jurisdictional mix of earning can vary depending on repatriation decision, operating fluctuations in the normal course of business and the impact of non-deductible and non-taxable items.
A reconciliation of reported diluted earnings per share (EPS), as reported under U.S. GAAP, to non-GAAP adjusted diluted EPS follows:
* Calculation not meaningful(a)    Diluted earnings per share was computed using the weighted-average common shares outstanding during the period plus the common stock equivalents related to stock options, restricted stock units, performance-vesting restricted stock units and deferred stock units. Adjusted net income includes the following charges for each of the periods presented:
Adjusted net income, as shown above, excludes the following items:
(a)    Income taxes include the tax effect of the associated pre-tax amounts, calculated by determining the jurisdictional location of the pre-tax amounts and applying that jurisdiction's applicable tax rate.      Income taxes in Purchase accounting adjustments also includes tax benefits related to a deferred adjustment as a result of a change in tax basis for the three months ended March 31, 2022.(b)    For the three months ended March 31, 2023, primarily consisted of employee termination costs related to organizational structure refinements.For the three months ended March 31, 2022, primarily consisted of product transfer costs.The classification of the above items excluded from adjusted net income are as follows:
Changes in other comprehensive income for the periods presented are primarily related to foreign currency translation adjustments and unrealized gains/(losses) on derivative instruments. The foreign currency translation adjustment changes result from the strengthening or weakening of the U.S. dollar as compared to the currencies in the countries in which we do business. Unrealized gains/(losses) on the changes in the fair value of derivative instruments are recorded within Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and reclassified into earnings depending on the nature and purpose of the financial instrument, as described in Note 9. Financial Instruments of the Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Inventories increased primarily as a result of the increase in demand and build-up of certain products, as well as lower sales than anticipated for certain products.Other current assets increased primarily due to the reclassification of certain assets from long-term to short-term, as well as the timing of tax benefits recognized, partially offset by the mark-to-market adjustment of derivative instruments.Property, plant and equipment increased primarily as a result of capital spending, partially offset by depreciation expense . Accrued compensation and related items decreased due to the payments of 2022 annual incentive bonuses, savings plan contributions to eligible employees and payments for sales incentive bonuses, as well as the timing of the bi-weekly payroll, partially offset by the accrual of 2023 annual incentive bonuses, sales incentive bonuses and savings plan contributions to eligible employees.The net changes in Noncurrent deferred tax assets, Noncurrent deferred tax liabilities, Income taxes payable and Other taxes payable primarily reflect adjustments to the accrual for the income tax provision, the timing of income tax payments, the tax impact of various acquisitions and the impact of the remeasurement of deferred taxes as a result of changes in tax rates.For an analysis of the changes in Total Equity, see the Condensed Consolidated Statements of Equity and Notes to Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements— Note 13. Stockholders' Equity.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $549 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, and $309 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The increase in operating cash flows was primarily attributable to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and higher net income as adjusted by non-cash items, partially offset by the inventory build-up of certain products for increased demand and to mitigate potential supply constraints.
Our net cash used in investing activities was $216 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with net cash used in investing activities of $118 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The net cash used in investing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 and 2022 was primarily due to capital expenditures.
Our net cash used in financing activities was $1,802 million for the three months ended March 31, 2023, compared with net cash used in financing activities of $545 million for the three months ended March 31, 2022. The net cash used in financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2023 was primarily attributable to the repayment of the $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 2013 senior notes due 2023 in February 2023, the purchase of treasury shares, the payment of dividends and taxes paid on withholding shares, partially offset by proceeds in connection with the issuance of common stock under our equity incentive plan. The net cash used in financing activities for the three months ended March 31, 2022 was primarily attributable to the purchase of treasury shares, the payment of dividends and taxes paid on withholding shares, partially offset by proceeds in connection with the issuance of common stock under our equity incentive plan.
While we believe our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our operating cash flows and our existing financing arrangements will be sufficient to support our cash needs for the next twelve months and beyond, this may be subject to the environment in which we operate. Risks to our meeting future funding requirements include global economic conditions described in the following paragraph. Global financial markets may be impacted by macroeconomic, business and financial volatility. As markets change, we will continue to monitor our liquidity position. While we do not anticipate it, there can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn will not impact our liquidity or our ability to obtain future financing.
Certain relevant measures of our liquidity and capital resources follow:
(a)    Accounts receivable are usually collected over a period of 45 to 75 days. For the three months ended March 31, 2023 compared with December 31, 2022, the number of days that accounts receivables were outstanding remained within this range. We regularly monitor our accounts receivable for collectability, particularly in markets where economic conditions remain uncertain. We believe that our allowance for doubtful accounts is appropriate. Our assessment is based on such factors as past due aging, historical and expected collection patterns, the financial condition of our customers, the robust nature of our credit and collection practices and the economic environment. For additional information about the sources and uses of our funds, see the Analysis of the condensed consolidated balance sheets and Analysis of the condensed consolidated statements of cash flows sections of this MD&A.
In December 2022, we entered into an amended and restated revolving credit agreement with a syndicate of banks providing for a multi-year $1.0 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility (the credit facility), which expires in December 2027. The credit facility replaced the company's existing revolving credit facility dated as of  December 2016. Subject to certain conditions, we have the right to increase the credit facility to up to $1.5 billion. The credit facility contains a financial covenant requiring us to not exceed a maximum total leverage ratio (the ratio of consolidated net debt as of the end of the period to consolidated Earnings Before Interest, Income Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization (EBITDA) for such period) of 3.50:1. Upon entering into a material acquisition, the maximum total leverage ratio increases to 4.00:1, and extends until the fourth full consecutive fiscal quarter ended immediately following the consummation of a material acquisition. In addition, the credit facility contains other customary covenants. We were in compliance with all financial covenants as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022. There were no amounts drawn under the credit facility as of March 31, 2023 or December 31, 2022.We have additional lines of credit and other credit arrangements with a group of banks and other financial intermediaries for general corporate purposes. We maintain cash and cash equivalent balances in excess of our outstanding short-term borrowings. As of March 31, 2023, we had access to $51 million of lines of credit which expire at various times and are generally renewed annually. There were $3 million of borrowings outstanding related to these facilities as of March 31, 2023 and $2 million of borrowings outstanding related to these facilities as of December 31, 2022.
Many of our operations are conducted outside the U.S. The amount of funds held in the U.S. will fluctuate due to the timing of receipts and payments in the ordinary course of business and due to other reasons, such as business development activities. As part of our ongoing liquidity assessments, we regularly monitor the mix of U.S. and international cash flows (both inflows and outflows). Actual repatriation of overseas funds can result in additional U.S. and local income taxes, such as U.S. state income taxes, local withholding taxes, and taxes on currency gains and losses.
Challenging economic conditions in recent years have not had, nor do we anticipate that it will have, a significant impact on our liquidity. Due to our operating cash flows, financial assets, access to capital markets and available lines of credit and revolving credit agreements, we continue to believe that we have the ability to meet our liquidity needs for the foreseeable future. As markets change, we continue to monitor our liquidity position. There can be no assurance that a challenging economic environment or an economic downturn would not impact our ability to obtain financing in the future.
On November 8, 2022, we issued $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our senior notes (2022 senior notes), with an original issue discount of $2 million. These notes are comprised of $600 million aggregate principal amount of 5.400% senior notes due 2025 and $750 million aggregate principal amount of 5.600% senior notes due 2032. On February 1, 2023, the net proceeds were used to redeem in full, upon maturity, the $1.35 billion aggregate principal amount of our 3.250% 2013 senior notes due 2023.Our senior notes are governed by an indenture and supplemental indentures (collectively, the indenture) between us and Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas, as trustee. The indenture contains certain covenants, including limitations on our and certain of our subsidiaries' ability to incur liens or engage in sale lease-back transactions. The indenture also contains restrictions on our ability to consolidate, merge or sell substantially all of our assets. In addition, the indenture contains other customary terms, including certain events of default, upon the occurrence of which, the senior notes may be declared immediately due and payable.Pursuant to the indenture, we are able to redeem the senior notes of any series, in whole or in part, at any time by paying a “make whole” premium, plus accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of redemption. Upon the occurrence of a change of control of us and a downgrade of the senior notes below an investment grade rating by each of Moody's Investors Service, Inc. and Standard & Poor's Ratings Services, we are, in certain circumstances, required to make an offer to repurchase all of the outstanding senior notes at a price equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of the senior notes together with accrued and unpaid interest to, but excluding, the date of repurchase.
Our outstanding debt securities are as follows:
Two major corporate debt-rating organizations, Moody's and S&P, assign ratings to our short-term and long-term debt. A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and the rating is subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the rating organization. Each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
The following table provides the current ratings assigned by these rating agencies to our commercial paper and senior unsecured non-credit-enhanced long-term debt:
In December 2021, our Board of Directors authorized a $3.5 billion multi-year share repurchase program. As of March 31, 2023, there was $2.3 billion remaining under this authorization. Purchases of Zoetis shares may be made at the discretion of management, depending on market conditions and business needs. Share repurchases may be executed through various means, including open market or privately negotiated transactions. During the first three months of 2023, 1.7 million shares were repurchased for $283 million, which excludes a $2 million accrual for excise tax on net share repurchases.
In the ordinary course of business and in connection with the sale of assets and businesses, we may indemnify our counterparties against certain liabilities that may arise in connection with a transaction or that are related to activities prior to a transaction. These indemnifications typically pertain to environmental, tax, employee and/or product-related matters, and patent-infringement claims. If the indemnified party were to make a successful claim pursuant to the terms of the indemnification, we would be required to reimburse the loss. These indemnifications are generally subject to threshold amounts, specified claim periods and other restrictions and limitations. Historically, we have not paid significant amounts under these provisions and, as of March 31, 2023 and December 31, 2022, recorded amounts for the estimated fair value of these indemnifications are not material.
There were no accounting standards that were recently issued but not adopted as of March 31, 2023 that the Company expects to have a material impact on its condensed consolidated financial statements.
This report contains “forward-looking” statements. We intend such forward-looking statements to be covered by the safe harbor provisions for forward-looking statements contained in Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933 and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. We generally identify forward-looking statements by using words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “could,” “expect,” “intend,” “project,” “plan,” “predict,” “believe,” “seek,” “continue,” “outlook,” “objective,” “target,” “may,” “might,” “will,” “should,” “can have,” “likely” or the negative version of these words or comparable words or by using future dates in connection with any discussion of future performance, actions or events.In particular, forward-looking statements include statements relating to our future actions, business plans or prospects, prospective products, product approvals or products under development, product and supply chain disruptions, R&D costs, timing and likelihood of success, future operating or financial performance, future results of current and anticipated products and services, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, strategies, sales efforts, expenses, production efficiencies, production margins, anticipated timing of generic market entries, integration of acquired businesses, interest rates, tax rates, changes in tax regimes and laws, foreign exchange rates, growth in emerging markets, the outcome of contingencies, such as legal proceedings, plans related to share repurchases and dividends, government regulation and financial results. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, actions or events. Forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond our control, and are based on assumptions that could prove to be inaccurate. Among the factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from past results and future plans and projected future results are the following:•unanticipated safety, quality or efficacy concerns or issues about our products,•the possible impact and timing of competing products, including generic alternatives, on our products and our ability to compete against such products;•the continuing decline in global economic conditions, including the current crisis in Ukraine, and inflation;•the economic, political, legal and business environment of the foreign jurisdictions in which we do business;•the impact of the COVID-19 global pandemic on our business, global supply chain, customers and workforce;•disruptive innovations and advances in medical practices and technologies;•consolidation of our customers and distributors;•changes in the distribution channel for companion animal products;•an outbreak of infectious disease carried by animals;•restrictions and bans on the use of and consumer preferences regarding antibacterials in food-producing animals;•perceived adverse effects linked to the consumption of food derived from animals that utilize our products or animals generally;•increased regulation or decreased governmental support relating to the raising, processing or consumption of food-producing animals;•failure to successfully acquire businesses, license rights or products, integrate businesses, form and manage alliances or divest businesses;•adverse weather conditions and the availability of natural resources;•the impact of climate change on our activities and the activities of our customers and suppliers, including, for example, altered distribution and intensity of rainfall, prolonged droughts or flooding, increased frequency of wildfires and other natural disasters, rising sea levels, and rising heat index;•failure of our R&D, acquisition and licensing efforts to generate new products and product lifecycle innovations;•difficulties or delays in the development or commercialization of new products;•product launch delays, inventory shortages, recalls or unanticipated costs caused by manufacturing problems and capacity imbalances;•fluctuations in foreign exchange rates and potential currency controls;•legal factors, including product liability claims, antitrust litigation and governmental investigations, including tax disputes, environmental concerns, commercial disputes and patent disputes with branded and generic competitors, any of which could preclude commercialization of products or negatively affect the profitability of existing products;•failure to protect our intellectual property rights or to operate our business without infringing the intellectual property rights of others;•a cyber-attack, information security breach or other misappropriation of our data;•quarterly fluctuations in demand and costs;•governmental laws and regulations affecting domestic and foreign operations, including without limitation, tax obligations and changes affecting the tax treatment by the U.S. of income earned outside the U.S. that may result from pending or possible future proposals;•governmental laws and regulations affecting our interactions with veterinary healthcare providers; and•the other factors set forth under "Risk Factors" in Item 1A. of Part I of our 2022 Annual Report on Form 10-K.However, there may also be other risks that we are unable to predict at this time. These risks or uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by a forward-looking statement. You should not put undue reliance on forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. We undertake no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law or by the rules and regulations of the SEC. You are advised, however, to consult any further disclosures we make on related subjects in our Form 10-Q and 8-K reports and our other filings with the SEC. You should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, you should not consider the above to be a complete discussion of all potential risks or uncertainties.